Number of pages: 123

Contents 
3
10516
Introduction to Data 
Engineering on Databricks
Case StudiesGuidance and Best Practices
Migrating Apache Spark™ ETL Workloads to Databricks 17
How Observability in Lakeflow Helps You Build Reliable Data Pipelines 22
A Cost Maturity Journey With Databricks 27
Lakeflow Connect: Efficient and Easy Data Ingestion Using  
the Microsoft SQL Server Connector 46
Implement CDC Data Load and SCD Type 2 With Lakeflow 62
Optimizing Materialized Views Recomputes 74
Reverse ETL With Lakebase: Activate Your Lakehouse Data  
for Operational Analytics 82
Production-Grade Data Quality Using Spark Declarative Pipelines 86
Collaborative Data Engineering Made Simple With Databricks  
Asset Bundles 94
A Practical Guide to Serverless Migrations 99
iFood: Transforming Data to Elevate Food Deliveries and Experiences 106
NFCU: Using Real-Time Data to Trailblaze Member Personalization 110
Cincinnati Reds: Winning On and Off the Field  
With Cutting-Edge Baseball Analytics 114
Porsche Holding: Unifying Customer Data to Drive  
a New Automotive Experience 117
Hinge Health: Developing Personalized Care Plans  
to Improve Patient Outcomes 120
2
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
01
Introduction to  
Data Engineering on Databricks
THE BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Introduction to Data Engineering  
on Databricks
As data volume continues to expand and the complexity of data sources and 
distribution intensifies, organizations struggle to maintain control of their data 
and effectively benefit from it. According to a recent IDC Data Valuation Survey, 
41% of organizations responded that data is changing faster than they can keep 
up with. Combined with an increased pressure to capitalize on AI, organizations 
across industries are facing new data-driven challenges they have to overcome 
to remain competitive in their field. Many of them running the data race 
encounter the same hard truth:
Everything, from AI to analytics to BI to applications, starts with good data.
This reality emphasizes the importance of building reliable data pipelines that 
can ingest or stream vast amounts of data efficiently and ensure high data 
quality reliably and at scale. A unified platform and good data engineering are 
essential components of success in every analytics, business intelligence (BI) 
and AI initiative. With the right data engineering solution, organizations can turn 
their proprietary data into real business assets and, in reverse, leverage those 
business insights to build their applications as well as their agentic workflows.
This book uses practical guidance, useful patterns, best practices and real-world 
examples to help you understand how data engineers can meet the challenges of 
this new era and how the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform can support you 
on your journey.
What is data engineering? 
Data engineering is the practice of taking raw data from a data source and 
processing it so it’s stored and organized for a downstream use case, such as 
data analytics, BI or machine learning (ML) model training. In other words, it’s the 
process of preparing data so that value can be extracted from it.
A useful way of thinking about data engineering is by using the following 
framework, which includes three main parts:
1. Ingest  
Data ingestion is the process of bringing data from one or more data 
sources into a data platform. These data sources can be files stored 
on-premises or in cloud storage services, databases, applications and, 
increasingly, data streams that produce real-time events. 
2. Transform  
Data transformation takes raw ingested data and uses a series of steps 
(referred to as “transformations”) to filter, standardize, clean and finally 
aggregate it so it’s stored in a usable way. A popular pattern is the 
medallion architecture, which defines three stages in the process — 
Bronze, Silver and Gold. 
3. Orchestrate  
Data orchestration refers to the way a data pipeline that performs 
ingestion and transformation is scheduled and monitored, as well as the 
control of the various pipeline steps and how it handles failures (e.g., by 
executing a retry run).
4
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Challenges of data engineering in the AI era
As previously mentioned, data engineering is key to ensuring reliable data for AI, 
analytics and BI initiatives. Data engineers who build and maintain ETL pipelines 
and the data infrastructure that underpins analytics and AI workloads face 
specific challenges in this fast-moving landscape.
 ■ Disparate data sources challenge most organizations: ISG predicts 
that by 2026, 8 in 10 enterprises will have their data spread across 
multiple cloud providers and on-premises data centers that span multiple 
locations. This decentralization creates a dependency on specialized, 
siloed teams, inefficient pipelines, development with high costs and slow 
time to value. As a result, data usage is limited and innovation is blocked.
 ■ Fragmented tooling: Most companies rely on multiple external tools and 
services or custom in-house solutions to manage their ETL processes. 
These tools are often disjointed with different architectures, interfaces 
and outputs, which adds another layer of complexity to the data 
engineering experience and leads to bottlenecked teams.
 ■ Handling real-time data: From mobile applications to sensor data 
on factory floors, more and more data is created and streamed in real 
time and requires low-latency processing so it can be used in real-time 
decision-making.
 ■ Scaling data pipelines reliably:  With data coming in large quantities 
and often in real time, scaling the compute infrastructure that runs data 
pipelines is challenging, especially when trying to keep costs low and 
performance high. Running data pipelines reliably, monitoring them and 
troubleshooting when failures occur are some of the most important 
responsibilities of data engineers.
 ■ Data quality: “Garbage in, garbage out.” High data quality is essential to 
training high-quality models and gaining actionable insights from data. 
Ensuring data quality is a key challenge for data engineers.
 ■ Governance and security: Data governance is becoming a key challenge 
for organizations that find their data spread across multiple systems, with 
increasingly larger numbers of internal teams looking to access and utilize 
it for different purposes. Securing and governing data is also an important 
regulatory concern that many organizations face, especially in highly 
regulated industries.
These challenges stress the importance of choosing the right data platform for 
navigating constantly evolving data needs, particularly in the age of AI. But a data 
platform in this age can also go beyond addressing just the challenges of building 
AI solutions. The right platform can improve the experience and productivity of 
data practitioners, including data engineers, by infusing intelligence and using AI 
to assist with daily engineering tasks.
In other words, the new data platform is a data intelligence platform.
5
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform
The Databricks mission is to democratize data and AI, allowing organizations 
to use their unique data to build or fine-tune their own machine learning and 
generative AI models to produce new insights that lead to business innovation.
The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform is built on lakehouse architecture to 
provide an open, unified foundation for all data and governance, and is powered 
by a Data Intelligence Engine that understands the uniqueness of your data. With 
these capabilities at its foundation, the Data Intelligence Platform lets Databricks 
customers run a variety of workloads, from business intelligence and data 
warehousing to AI and data science.
To get a better understanding of the Databricks Platform, the next page shows 
an overview of the different parts of the architecture as it relates to data 
engineering. The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform enables you to execute 
all your data, analytics, BI and AI initiatives. As a 100% serverless platform, it 
provides you with built-in features such as disaster recovery, cost controls and 
enterprise security. Key components feature Mosaic AI with end-to-end AI for 
both generative and classical AI; Databricks SQL, a serverless intelligent data 
warehouse; unified data engineering with Lakeflow, a built-in database with 
Lakebase; and AI/BI that integrates deeply with Databricks SQL to easily extend 
business intelligence across your business.
6
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
7
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Several elements of the Data Intelligence Platform are particularly important 
for data engineers and are worth a closer look. The next section will dive into 
Lakeflow — the unified data engineering solution for ingestion, transformation 
and orchestration. But first, it is worth understanding the foundational pieces of 
the platform that provide important value to data engineers:
UNIFIED AND OPEN GOVERNANCE  
WITH DATABRICKS UNITY CATALOG
Unity Catalog (UC) provides a single, centralized data catalog for managing 
permissions, auditing and lineage across all data and AI assets in the lakehouse.  
It supports all major open formats, including Delta Lake, Apache Iceberg™,  
Hudi and Parquet, so data engineers can choose the right format for their 
workloads without lock-in. With built-in access controls, data quality monitoring 
and column-level lineage, Unity Catalog makes it easier to enforce compliance 
and trust while accelerating development. Interoperability across formats and 
secure data sharing through Delta Sharing ensure engineers can collaborate 
across teams, platforms and clouds while maintaining consistent governance. 
Unity Catalog reduces complexity, scales with the needs of modern data 
platforms and keeps openness and reliability at the foundation of every data 
engineering workflow.
ACCELERATING PRODUCTIVITY  
WITH THE DATABRICKS ASSISTANT
Databricks combines generative AI with the unification benefits of a lakehouse to 
power a Data Intelligence Engine that understands your data’s unique semantics. 
This allows the Databricks Platform to automatically optimize performance and 
manage infrastructure in ways unique to your business. Built on this engine is the 
Databricks Assistant — a context-aware AI assistant that offers a conversational 
API to query data, generate code, explain code queries and even fix issues. The 
Databricks Assistant helps practitioners, including data engineers, become more 
productive by cutting down the time it takes to build new data pipelines and to 
troubleshoot pipeline issues.
BUILT-IN AND AI-READY DATABASE WITH LAKEBASE
Every application runs on a database and Postgres is the database of choice for 
most application developers. Databricks Lakebase is a fully managed Postgres 
database deeply integrated in the lakehouse to make it easy to build data and AI 
applications. Lakebase automatically syncs lakehouse data and features/models 
into an operational database for low-latency applications, dashboards and CRM 
systems. With Lakebase, engineering teams can focus on delivering insights to 
applications instead of building custom pipelines, managing infrastructure or 
administering databases.
8
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
A RICH ECOSYSTEM OF DATA SOLUTIONS
The Data Intelligence Platform is built on open source technologies and uses 
open standards, so leading data solutions can be leveraged with anything you 
build on the lakehouse.
A large collection of technology partners makes it easy and simple to integrate 
the technologies you rely on when migrating to Databricks — and you are not 
locked into a closed data technology stack.
9
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Unified data engineering with Databricks Lakeflow
Lakeflow simplifies and unifies the data engineering experience with an 
integrated and modern ETL platform built on top of the Data Intelligence 
Platform. Its intuitive and centralized interface for data ingestion, transformation 
and orchestration reduces tool sprawl, accelerates time to production and value, 
and unlocks data engineering for more users across the organization. Lakeflow 
enables data engineering teams to move faster and more reliably, without 
compromising governance, scalability or performance. 
Lakeflow is made of three deeply integrated components:
 ■ Lakeflow Connect for ingestion
 ■ Lakeflow Spark Declarative Pipelines for transformation
 ■ Lakeflow Jobs for orchestration 
In addition, the Lakeflow Designer is a no-code experience meant to help any 
practitioner build data pipelines on top of Lakeflow. 
10
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
DATA INGESTION WITH LAKEFLOW CONNECT 
Databricks enables organizations to efficiently ingest data from various systems 
into a single, open and unified lakehouse architecture. Lakeflow Connect offers 
simple data ingestion connectors for applications, databases, cloud storage, 
message buses and more, into your lakehouse. These built-in connectors provide 
efficient end-to-end incremental ingestion at scale, easy setup with a point-and-
click UI or API, and unified governance via Unity Catalog. With Lakeflow Connect, 
Databricks has continued to innovate, expanding the breadth of supported data 
sources with built-in, managed connectors, as well as connectors with more 
customization options. Zerobus Ingest enables you to push event data directly 
to your lakehouse without requiring a message bus, thereby simplifying ingestion 
for IoT, clickstream, telemetry and other similar use cases. Auto Loader is a 
fully customizable connector that provides a Structured Streaming source for 
incrementally and efficiently processing data as it arrives in cloud object storage, 
recommended for usage with Declarative Pipelines.
Built-in data connectors for enterprise applications, file sources and databases
11
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
DATA TRANSFORMATION FOR SPARK DECLARATIVE PIPELINES
Spark Declarative Pipelines is a declarative ETL framework (built on the open 
source Apache Spark™ Declarative Pipelines) that helps data teams simplify 
and make ETL cost-effective in streaming and batch. Simply define the 
transformations you want to perform on your data and let Spark Declarative 
Pipelines automatically handle task orchestration, compute management, 
monitoring, data quality and error management. Engineers can treat their data 
as code and apply modern software engineering best practices like testing, error 
handling, monitoring and documentation to deploy reliable pipelines at scale. 
Declarative Pipelines fully supports both Python and SQL and is tailored to work 
with both streaming and batch workloads.
Reliable data pipelines made easy with Spark Declarative Pipelines
12
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
UNIFIED DATA ORCHESTRATION WITH LAKEFLOW JOBS
Lakeflow Jobs offers a simple, reliable orchestration solution for data, analytics 
and AI on the Data Intelligence Platform. Lakeflow Jobs lets you define multistep 
workflows to implement ETL pipelines, ML training workflows and more. It 
offers enhanced control flow capabilities and supports different task types 
and workflow triggering options. As the platform’s native orchestrator, Lakeflow 
Jobs also provides advanced observability to monitor and visualize workflow 
execution, along with alerting and troubleshooting capabilities for when issues 
arise. Lakeflow Jobs comes with serverless compute options, so you can leverage 
smart scaling and efficient task execution.
PRODUCTION-GRADE DATA PIPELINES, NO-CODE REQUIRED 
WITH LAKEFLOW DESIGNER
Analytics projects require collaboration between data engineers and business 
analysts, who often work on separate platforms. While no-code tools can help 
bridge this gap, challenges remain with siloed workflows, production headaches 
and limited AI productivity. Lakeflow Designer solves this with a no-code, 
AI-assisted tool — native to the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform — that 
empowers business analysts and others to build production-ready data 
pipelines with natural language. Powered by data intelligence, Lakeflow Designer 
empowers shared, collaborative workflows with a built-in path to production, 
built on AI that understands your business.
13
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Why data engineers choose Databricks Lakeflow 
and the Data Intelligence Platform
So, how do the Data Intelligence Platform and Lakeflow help with each of the data 
engineering challenges discussed earlier?
 ■ Unified data engineering experience: Lakeflow brings together all 
key aspects of data engineering, from ingestion (Lakeflow Connect) to 
transformation (Spark Declarative Pipelines) and orchestration (Lakeflow 
Jobs), in a single solution built on top of the Data Intelligence Platform. 
Through a centralized and simplified data platform, you can eliminate silos 
across teams, minimize tool sprawl and improve operational efficiencies.
 ■ Efficient ingestion, wide range of data connectors: Lakeflow allows you 
to efficiently ingest data, only bringing in new data or table updates. With 
a growing set of native connectors for popular data sources, as well as a 
broad network of data ingestion partners, you can easily move data from 
siloed systems into your data platform. Ingesting and storing your data 
in Delta Lake while leveraging the reliability and scalability of the Data 
Intelligence Platform is the first step in extracting value from your data and 
accelerating innovation.
 ■ Real-time data stream processing: Lakeflow simplifies development and 
operations by automating the production aspects associated with building 
and maintaining real-time data workloads. Spark Declarative Pipelines 
provides a declarative way to define streaming ETL pipelines, and Spark 
Structured Streaming helps build real-time applications for real-time 
decision-making.
 ■ Reliable data pipelines at scale: Lakeflow uses smart autoscaling and 
auto-optimized resource management to handle high-scale workloads. 
With lakehouse architecture, the high scalability of data lakes are 
combined with the high reliability of data warehouses, thanks to Delta Lake 
— the storage format that sits at the foundation of the lakehouse.
 ■ Data quality: High reliability — starting at the storage level with 
Lakehouse Storage and coupled with data quality-specific features 
offered by Spark Declarative Pipelines — ensures high data quality. These 
features include setting data “expectations” to handle corrupt or missing 
data, as well as automatic retries. In addition, both Lakeflow Jobs and 
Spark Declarative Pipelines provide full observability to data engineers, 
making issue resolution faster and easier.
 ■ Unified governance with secure data sharing: Unity Catalog provides 
a single governance model for the entire platform, so every dataset and 
pipeline is governed consistently. Datasets are discoverable and can 
be securely shared with internal or external teams using Delta Sharing. 
In addition, because Unity Catalog is a cross-platform governance 
solution, it provides valuable lineage information, so it’s easy to have a full 
understanding of how each dataset and table is used downstream and 
where it originates upstream. 
14
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Conclusion
As organizations strive to innovate by leveraging their data, data engineering 
is a focal point for success by delivering reliable, real-time data pipelines that 
make AI possible. With Databricks Lakeflow, built on lakehouse architecture and 
powered by data intelligence, data engineers are set up for success in dealing 
with the critical challenges posed in the modern data landscape. By leaning on 
the advanced capabilities of Lakeflow and the entire Data Intelligence Platform, 
data engineers don’t need to spend as much time managing complex pipelines 
or dealing with reliability, scalability and data quality issues. Instead, they can 
focus on innovation and bringing more value to the organization.
In the next section, we describe best practices for data engineering and end-to-
end use cases drawn from real-world examples. From data ingestion and real-
time processing to orchestration and data federation, you’ll learn how to apply 
proven patterns and make the best use of the different capabilities of Lakeflow 
and the Data Intelligence Platform.
15
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
02
Guidance and Best Practices
THE BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Migrating Apache Spark™ ETL Workloads  
to Databricks
By Dinesh Kumar
Introduction
Migrating Spark ETL workloads to Databricks unlocks faster performance, lowers 
costs and enhances scalability. With built-in support for Delta Lake, automated 
compute management and an optimized Spark engine, Databricks simplifies and 
modernizes your data pipelines.
In this chapter, I will cover key best practices for a smooth and efficient 
migration, ranging from workload assessment to performance tuning. Whether 
you're lifting and shifting, refactoring or re-architecting your pipelines, these 
steps will ensure you unlock the full potential of Databricks.
Assessment and planning for Databricks migration
A successful migration to Databricks begins with a structured approach, 
including a comprehensive inventory of existing workloads, assessing 
compatibility and setting clear migration objectives.
1. Inventory existing workloads: Classify your workloads as batch or 
streaming and document key assets for migration, including jobs, 
workflows, parameters, resource utilization, execution frequency and data 
consumers. A comprehensive inventory will give you a clear overview of 
the migration-ready components.
2. Determine compatibility: Identify any proprietary or environment-
specific features that might not directly translate to Databricks. You 
must also identify and assess cloud providers and external service 
dependencies to ensure smooth integration during migration.
3. Set migration objectives: Define clear goals and success criteria for 
the migration, including cost of ownership, governance, performance 
improvements, scalability and architecture simplicity
4. Choose the right migration strategy: The key to a successful Databricks 
migration is choosing the right strategy: Lift-and-Shift, Refactor or Re-
architect. Each option has its trade-offs regarding effort, flexibility and 
long-term scalability. Lift-and-Shift is the quickest strategy, involving 
minimal changes to workloads. It lets you immediately leverage Databricks 
performance and cost benefits, delivering a fast ROI. While it may not be 
a fully optimized architecture, it accelerates value realization and sets the 
stage for future enhancements.
For more details, please check out our documentation here.
17
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Security and access control
As your data scales on Databricks, robust security and governance become 
critical. Databricks unified tools help centralize data permissions, enabling 
decentralized, secure innovation across teams.
Unity Catalog is the foundation for unifying governance, providing fine-grained 
permissions across catalogs, schemas, tables, views and columns. It also 
captures runtime data lineage, enables easy data discovery via the catalog 
explorer and allows for monitoring through audit logs. Unity Catalog also helps 
protect sensitive data with built-in data masking and row-level security.
Identity federation simplifies centralized user and group management by 
integrating with identity providers like Azure AD or Okta. SCIM provisioning 
automates syncing users and groups, supporting seamless access management 
and Single Sign-On (SSO) for an enhanced user experience.
Adopting the Data Mesh architecture for federated governance and assigning 
data ownership to domain-specific teams accelerates decision-making, 
empowers teams to manage their data and enhances agility and scalability.
Terraform templates will also help automate resource deployment and maintain 
scalability across the platform, ensuring infrastructure consistency and security.
Refactor and optimize code
  Optimizing and refactoring your code is crucial for improving compatibility 
and performance on Databricks while setting up a solid foundation  
for long-term success.
ADAPT CODE FOR DATABRICKS COMPATIBILITY
While Lift-and-Shift can speed up deployment, legacy code might impact 
performance and stability. I'd like you to take this opportunity to audit and 
streamline your pipelines, identifying components that might not integrate 
seamlessly with Databricks. Common challenges include custom JARs, Hive UDFs 
and infrastructure-specific configurations that may need refactoring to align with 
Databricks’ cloud-native environment. Proactively addressing these issues helps 
reduce technical debt and ensures smoother, more stable migrations.
REFACTOR DATA PROCESSING LOGIC
Refactoring legacy data processing logic modernizes your pipelines and 
simplifies the migration. Remorph Transpile and BladeBridge tools can automate 
SQL code conversion, reducing manual effort. Leveraging Delta Lake enhances 
reliability and performance with features like ACID transactions and schema 
enforcement, ensuring compatibility and providing a scalable foundation for 
future growth.
18
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Migrate streaming data to Databricks:  
Simplify and optimize your pipelines
Migrating streaming data pipelines to Databricks can unlock faster insights, 
improve performance and reduce operational costs. Whether you're moving 
away from legacy stream processors or consolidating multiple tools, Databricks 
offers a seamless migration path, providing key features designed for streamlined 
performance, scalability and ease of management.
SPARK DECLARATIVE PIPELINES (SDP): SIMPLIFYING 
STREAMING DATA PIPELINES
SDP simplifies building and managing streaming pipelines by allowing you to use 
SQL or Python in a declarative format. It automatically handles orchestration, 
retries and dependencies so that you can focus on pipeline logic instead of 
operational challenges.
SDP supports batch and streaming data, streamlining the migration of streaming 
workloads and improving pipeline maintainability by reducing the need for 
multiple tools or custom solutions.
KEY FEATURES OF SPARK DECLARATIVE PIPELINES
 ■ Declarative streaming pipelines: Simplifies pipeline creation by 
eliminating low-level details like scheduling, retries and state management, 
allowing developers to focus on business logic
 ■ Batch and continuous modes: Supports batch and real-time streaming, 
offering flexibility for various data processing needs
 ■ Data quality checks: Integrated data quality checks to ensure accurate 
data processing
 ■ Schema evolution: Adapting to data model changes reduces manual 
effort and ensures pipeline robustness
 ■ Multi-catalog publishing: Allows data publishing to multiple catalogs  
for flexible access and management
AUTO LOADER: SCALABLE INGESTION  
WITH MINIMAL OVERHEAD
Auto Loader simplifies incremental file ingestion from cloud storage (e.g., S3, 
ADLS). It automatically infers schemas, adapts to schema changes in real time 
and handles high-volume, low-latency workloads. Auto Loader is ideal for 
streaming migrations, ensuring efficient, seamless data pipeline management.
STRUCTURED STREAMING: REAL-TIME ANALYTICS AT SCALE
Structured Streaming, built on Apache Spark, provides flexibility and resilience 
for your streaming architecture. Combined with Delta Lake, it offers low-latency 
processing, exactly-once semantics and ACID compliance, enabling scalable and 
reliable real-time data pipelines.
LAKEFLOW CONNECT: STREAMLINED INTEGRATION  
WITH EXTERNAL SOURCES
Lakeflow Connect provides fully managed connectors to easily ingest data from 
SaaS applications and databases into your lakehouse. Powered by Unity Catalog 
and serverless compute, it ensures fast, scalable and cost-effective incremental 
data ingestion, keeping your data fresh and ready for downstream use.
19
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Optimizing data storage and access in Databricks
As data volumes grow, optimizing how data is stored and accessed becomes 
critical for maintaining performance, reducing costs and ensuring reliability. 
Databricks offers several advanced features to optimize Delta Lake and enhance 
performance at scale.
KEY OPTIMIZATIONS:
 ■ Optimize and file compaction: Address small file issues with auto 
compaction and optimized writes, but still rely on OPTIMIZE for manual 
fine-tuning. In addition, Liquid Clustering and Z-Ordering can be 
used to adjust data organization based on predicted fields to improve 
performance further. 
 ■ Disk Caching and Photon Execution Engine: Delta Caching stores 
frequently accessed data in memory or SSDs to reduce query latency, and 
Photon Execution Engine runs workloads and queries more efficiently
 ■ Predictive optimization: Removes the need to manage maintenance 
operations for Unity Catalog manually managed tables on Databricks
If further reference is needed, please check the best practices for performance 
efficiency, tune-file size and delta vacuum documentation.
Cluster management and optimization  
in Databricks
Optimizing cluster configurations is essential for balancing performance and cost 
in Databricks. A workload-aware approach is key and you should experiment with 
different cluster types and settings that best fit your  
pipeline requirements.
BEST PRACTICES:
 ■ Job clusters: Use job clusters for ephemeral workloads to minimize  
idle costs
 ■ Cluster types: Select memory-optimized VMs for cache-heavy tasks and 
compute-optimized VMs for high-throughput transformations
 ■ Auto-scaling: Enable autoscaling to adjust resources based on workload 
demand automatically
 ■ Serverless: Go serverless to eliminate cluster management overhead for 
ad hoc queries and BI dashboards
If further reference is needed, please check cluster configuration,  
cost optimization for the data lakehouse, Comprehensive Guide  
to Optimize Databricks, Spark, and Delta Lake Workloads and connect  
to serverless compute.
20
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Testing and validation for ETL workload migration
Migrating ETL workloads isn’t just about moving code — it's about preserving 
data quality, performance and functional accuracy. Automate tests to validate 
data accuracy and pipeline dependencies as well as benchmark key metrics to 
track performance improvements.
The recommended approach is automating testing with tools like Remorph 
Reconcile, DataCompy or SQLglot. These tools help reduce manual effort, 
boosting confidence in your migration's success.
It is also essential to adopt a phased rollout strategy, running the new and legacy 
systems side by side for validation and monitoring before entirely switching to 
Databricks. This approach ensures a low-risk migration with minimal disruption.
Workflow management and orchestration  
in Databricks
Shifting orchestration into Lakeflow Jobs can streamline ETL management, 
improve dependency handling and enable centralized monitoring. Databricks 
natively supports Apache Airflow via the DatabricksRunNowOperator, allowing 
you to migrate orchestration without breaking your existing DAGs. Over time, 
consider moving workflows to the Databricks native visual interface and YAML -
based configuration for more flexibility and ease of use.
Monitoring and optimization post-migration
After migration, maintaining an efficient Databricks environment is crucial.  
Built-in tools like Spark UI, Databricks Metrics UI, System Tables  
and Cluster Event Logs can help you gain insights into execution, resource 
usage and cluster behavior.
As workloads stabilize, fine-tune performance by analyzing real-time data. Adjust 
resources by right-sizing clusters, refining autoscaling and optimizing partitioning 
or caching strategies to improve query performance and reduce I/O.
Additional references are available on create a dashboard, usage dashboard  
and system tables overview.
Conclusion
Migrating to Databricks requires careful planning, execution, and ongoing 
optimization. By following a structured approach, assessing workloads, optimizing 
code, and leveraging Databricks’ powerful features, you can ensure a seamless 
migration that improves performance, scalability, and cost-efficiency without 
interrupting ongoing business. With Databricks, your organization can scale data 
processing pipelines while reducing operational costs, setting you up for short-
term success and long-term growth.
21
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
How Observability in Lakeflow Helps You 
Build Reliable Data Pipelines
Lakeflow’s suite of observability features provides data 
engineers with the tools to confidently maintain efficient, reliable 
and healthy data pipelines at scale.
By Joanna Zouhour and Theresa Hammer
As data volume grows, so do the risks for your data platform: from stale pipelines 
to hidden errors and runaway costs. Without observability integrated into your 
data engineering solution, you are flying blind and risking impacting not just the 
health and freshness of your data pipelines but also missing serious issues in 
your downstream data, analytics, and AI workloads.  With Lakeflow, a Databricks 
unified and intelligent data engineering solution, you can easily tackle this 
challenge with built-in observability solutions in an intuitive interface directly 
within your ETL platform, on top of your data intelligence.
In this chapter, we will introduce Lakeflow’s observability capabilities and show 
how to build reliable, fresh, and healthy data pipelines.
Observability is essential for data engineering
Observability for data engineering is the ability to discover, monitor, and 
troubleshoot systems to ensure the ETL operates correctly and effectively. It is 
the key to maintaining healthy and reliable data pipelines, surfacing insights and 
delivering trustworthy downstream analytics. 
As organizations manage an increasingly growing number of business-critical 
pipelines, monitoring and ensuring the reliability of a data platform has become 
vital for a business. To tackle this challenge, more data engineers are recognizing 
and seeking the benefits of observability. According to Gartner, 65% of data and 
analytics leaders expect data observability to become a core part of their data 
strategy within two years. Data engineers who want to stay current and find 
ways to improve productivity while driving stable data at scale should implement 
observability practices in their data engineering platform.
Establishing the right observability for your organization involves bringing the 
following key capabilities: 
 ■ End-to-end visibility at scale: Eliminate blind spots and uncover system 
insights by easily viewing and analyzing your jobs and data pipelines in one 
single location
 ■ Proactive monitoring and early failure detection: Identify potential 
issues as soon as they arise, before they impact anything downstream
 ■ Troubleshooting and optimization: Fix problems to ensure the quality 
of your outputs and optimize your system's performance to improve 
operational costs
Read on to see how Lakeflow supports all of these in a single experience. Watch 
the video.
22
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
End-to-end visibility at scale into jobs  
and pipelines
Effective observability begins with complete visibility. Lakeflow comes  
with a variety of out-of-the-box visualizations and unified views to help you  
stay on top of your data pipelines and make sure your entire ETL process is 
running smoothly.
FEWER BLIND SPOTS WITH A CENTRALIZED AND GRANULAR 
VIEW OF YOUR JOBS AND PIPELINES
The Jobs and Pipelines page centralizes access to all your jobs, pipelines, and 
their run history across the workspace. This unified overview of your runs 
simplifies the discovery and management of your data pipelines and makes it 
easier to visualize executions and track trends for more proactive monitoring.
Looking for more information about your jobs? Just click on any job to go to a 
dedicated page that features a Matrix View and highlights key details like status, 
duration, trends, warnings, and more. You can:
 ■ Easily drill down into a specific job run for additional insights, such as the 
graph view to visualize dependencies or point of failure
 ■ Zoom in to see the task level (like pipeline, notebook output, etc.) for more 
details, such as streaming metrics (available in Public Preview) 
Lakeflow also offers a dedicated Pipeline Run page where you can easily  
monitor the status and metrics and track the progress of your pipeline execution 
across tables.
Easily go from an overview of your jobs and pipeline runs to more detailed information on jobs and tasks
23
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
MORE INSIGHTS WITH VISUALIZATION OF YOUR DATA  
AT SCALE
In addition to these unified views, Lakeflow provides historical observability for 
your workloads to get insights into your usage and trends. Using System Tables, 
Databricks-managed tables that track and consolidate every job and pipeline 
created across all workspaces in a region. You can build detailed dashboards 
and reports to visualize your jobs and pipelines’ data at scale. With the recently 
updated interactive dashboard template for Lakeflow System Tables, it’s much 
easier and faster to: 
 ■ Track execution trends: easily surface insights around job behavior over 
time for better data-driven decisions
 ■ Identify bottlenecks: detect potential performance issues (covered in 
more detail in the following section) 
 ■ Cross-reference with billing: improve cost monitoring and avoid  
billing surprises 
Build dashboards using system tables in Lakeflow and get a high-level overview of your jobs  
and pipelines’ health
Visibility extends beyond just the task or job level. Lakeflow’s integration with 
Unity Catalog, the Databricks unified governance solution, helps complete the 
picture with a visual of your entire data lineage. This makes it easier to trace data 
flow and dependencies and get the full context and impact of your pipelines and 
jobs in one place. 
Track data lineage using Databricks Unity Catalog
24
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Proactive monitoring, early detection of job 
failures, troubleshooting and optimization
As data engineers, you’re not just responsible for monitoring your systems. You 
also need to be proactive about any issues or performance gaps that might 
come up in your ETL development and address them before they impact your 
outputs and costs.
PROACTIVE ALERTING TO CATCH THINGS EARLY
With Lakeflow’s native notifications, you can choose if and how to be alerted 
about critical job errors, durations or backlogs via Slack, email or even PagerDuty. 
Event hooks  in Spark Declarative Pipelines (currently in Public Preview) give you 
even more flexibility by defining custom Python callback functions so you decide 
what to monitor or when to be alerted on specific events.
FASTER ROOT CAUSE ANALYSIS FOR QUICK REMEDIATION
Once you receive the alert, the next step is to understand why something  
went wrong.
Lakeflow allows you to jump from the notification directly into the detailed view 
of a specific job or task failure for in-context root cause analysis. The level of 
detail and flexibility with which you can see your workflow data allows you to 
easily identify what exactly is responsible for the error.
For instance, using the matrix view of a job, you can track failure and 
performance patterns across tasks for one specific workflow. Meanwhile, the 
timeline (Gantt) view breaks down the duration of each task and query (for 
serverless jobs) so you can spot slow performance issues in one job and dig 
deeper for root causes using Query Profiles. As a reminder, Databricks Query 
Profiles show a quick overview of your SQL, Python and Declarative Pipeline 
executions, making it easy to identify bottlenecks and optimize workloads in your 
ETL platform.
You can also rely on System Tables to make root cause analysis easier by building 
dashboards that highlight irregularities across your jobs and their dependencies. 
These dashboards help you quickly identify not just failures but also 
performance gaps or latency improvement opportunities, such as latency P50/
P90/P99 and cluster metrics. To complement your analysis, you can leverage 
lineage data and query history system tables so you can easily track upstream 
errors and downstream impacts through data lineage.
Easily find the root cause of your issues with Query History System Tables
25
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
DEBUGGING AND OPTIMIZATION FOR RELIABLE PIPELINES
In addition to root cause analysis, Lakeflow gives you tools for quick 
troubleshooting, whether it’s a compute resource issue or a configuration  
error. Once you’ve addressed the issue, you can run the failed tasks  
and their dependencies without re-running the entire job, saving you 
computational resources. 
Facing more complex troubleshooting use cases? Databricks Assistant, our AI-
powered assistant (currently in Public Preview), provides clear insights and helps 
you diagnose errors in your jobs and pipelines.
Easily troubleshoot issues in your data pipelines with the “Repair job run” functionality
Summary of Lakeflow’s observability capabilities
Start building reliable data engineering  
with Lakeflow
Lakeflow offers the support you need to ensure your jobs and pipelines run 
smoothly, are healthy, and operate reliably at scale. Try our built-in observability 
solutions and see how you can build a data engineering platform ready for your 
data intelligence efforts and business needs.
 ■ Learn more about Lakeflow Observability 
 ■ Watch the Lakeflow Observability session from our Data + AI summit  
on demand
KEY OBSERVABILITY PILLARS LAKEFLOW CAPABILITIES
End-to-end visibility at scale  ■ Unified Views
 ■ System Tables for Jobs  
and Pipelines
 ■ Data Lineage with Unity Catalog
Proactive Monitoring and Early 
Failure Detection
 ■ Alerts and Notifications
 ■ Event Hooks
 ■ Health metrics (coming soon)
Troubleshooting and Performance 
Optimization
 ■ Matrix views
 ■ Gantt views
 ■ Query Profiles (System Tables)
 ■ Re-run tasks
 ■ Databricks Assistant
26
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
A Cost Maturity Journey With Databricks
Use a structured process to assess Databricks cost control 
maturity, identify usage patterns, enforce budgets, optimize 
workloads and reduce unnecessary spend
By Zach King and Rajneesh Arora
Introduction: The importance of FinOps  
in data and AI environments 
Companies across every industry have continued to prioritize optimization 
and the value of doing more with less. This is especially true of digital native 
companies in today’s data landscape, which yields higher and higher demand 
for AI and data-intensive workloads. These organizations manage thousands 
of resources in various cloud and platform environments. In order to innovate 
and iterate quickly, many of these resources are democratized across teams or 
business units. However, higher velocity for data practitioners can lead to chaos 
unless balanced with careful cost management.
Digital native organizations frequently employ central platform, DevOps 
or FinOps teams to oversee the costs and controls for cloud and platform 
resources. Formal practice of cost control and oversight, popularized by The 
FinOps Foundation™ , is also supported by Databricks with features such as 
tagging, budgets, compute policies and more. Nonetheless, the decision to 
prioritize cost management and establish structured ownership does not 
create cost maturity overnight. The methodologies and features covered in this 
chapter enable teams to incrementally mature cost management within the Data 
Intelligence Platform.
27
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
What we’ll cover:
 ■ Cost Attribution: Reviewing the key considerations for allocating costs with 
tagging and budget policies
 ■ Cost Reporting: Monitoring costs with Databricks AI/BI dashboards
 ■ Cost Control: Automatically enforcing cost controls with Terraform, 
Compute Policies, and Databricks Asset Bundles (DABs)
 ■ Cost Optimization: Common Databricks optimization checklist items
Whether you’re an engineer, architect or FinOps professional, this chapter 
will help you maximize efficiency while minimizing costs, ensuring that your 
Databricks environment remains both high-performing and cost-effective.
Technical solution breakdown
We will now take an incremental approach to implementing mature cost 
management practices on the Databricks Platform. Think of this as the "crawl, 
walk, run" journey to go from chaos to control. We will explain how to implement 
this journey step by step.
Step 1: Cost attribution
The first step is to correctly assign expenses to the right teams, projects or 
workloads. This involves efficiently tagging all the resources (including serverless 
compute) to gain a clear view of where costs are being incurred. Proper 
attribution enables accurate budgeting and accountability across teams.
Cost attribution can be done for all compute SKUs with a tagging strategy, 
whether for a classic or serverless compute model. Classic compute (workflows, 
Declarative Pipelines, SQL Warehouse, etc.) inherits tags on the cluster definition, 
while serverless adheres to Serverless Budget Policies (AWS | Azure | GCP).
In general, you can add tags to two kinds of resources:
1. Compute Resources: Includes SQL Warehouse, jobs, instance pools, etc.
2. Unity Catalog Securables: Includes catalog, schema, table, view, etc.
Tagging for both types of resources would contribute to effective governance 
and management:
1. Tagging the compute resources has a direct impact on cost management
2. Tagging Unity Catalog securables helps with organizing and searching 
those objects, but this is outside the scope of this chapter
Refer to this article (AWS | AZURE | GCP) for details about tagging different 
compute resources and this article (AWS | Azure | GCP) for details about tagging 
Unity Catalog securables.
28
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
TAGGING CLASSIC COMPUTE
For classic compute, tags can be specified in the settings when creating the 
compute. Below are some examples of different types of compute to show how 
tags can be defined for each, using both the UI and the Databricks SDK.
SQL Warehouse Compute:
You can set the tags for a SQL Warehouse in the Advanced Options section.
With Databricks SDK:
PYTHON
from databricks.sdk import WorkspaceClient
from databricks.sdk.service.sql import EndpointTags, EndpointTagPair
w = WorkspaceClient()
def update_warehouse_tags(warehouse_id: str, tags: dict):
    """Update the tags for a warehouse.
    Args:
        warehouse_id: The ID of the warehouse to update.
        tags: A dictionary of tags to update.
    """
    warehouse = w.warehouses.get(warehouse_id)
    current_tags = {}
    if warehouse.tags and warehouse.tags.custom_tags:
        for tag in warehouse.tags.custom_tags:
            current_tags[tag.key] = tag.value
    current_tags.update(tags)
    pairs = [EndpointTagPair(key=key, value=value) for key, value in 
current_tags.items()]
    w.warehouses.edit_and_wait(warehouse_id, 
tags=EndpointTags(custom_tags=pairs))
29
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
All-Purpose Compute:
Job Compute:
With Databricks SDK:
PYTHON
def update_ap_cluster_tags(cluster_id: str, tags: dict):
    """Update the tags for an AP cluster.
    Args:
        cluster_id: The ID of the cluster to update.
        tags: A dictionary of tags to update.
    """
    cluster = w.clusters.get(cluster_id)
    current_tags = {}
    if cluster.custom_tags:
        current_tags = cluster.custom_tags
    current_tags.update(tags)
    cluster.custom_tags = current_tags
    w.clusters.update(cluster_id, "custom_tags", 
cluster=UpdateClusterResource(custom_tags=current_tags))
30
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
With Databricks SDK:
TAGGING SERVERLESS COMPUTE
For serverless compute, you should assign tags with a budget policy. Creating a 
policy allows you to specify a policy name and tags of string keys and values. 
It's a three-step process:
 ■ Step 1: Create a budget policy (workspace admins can create one and 
users with Manage access can manage them)
 ■ Step 2: Assign Budget Policy to users, groups and service principals
 ■ Step 3: Once the policy is assigned, the user is required to select a policy 
when using serverless compute. If the user has only one policy assigned, 
that policy is automatically selected. If the user has multiple policies 
assigned, they have the option to choose one of them.
You can refer to details about serverless Budget Policies (BP) in these articles 
(AWS | Azure | GCP).
Declarative Pipelines: 
PYTHON
def update_job_tags(job_id: str, tags: dict):
    """Update the tags for a job.
    Args:
        job_id: The ID of the job to update.
        tags: A dictionary of tags to update.
    """
    job = w.jobs.get(job_id)
    settings = job.settings
    if not job.settings.tags:
        settings.tags = tags
    else:
        settings.tags.update(tags)
    w.jobs.update(job_id, new_settings=settings)
31
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Certain aspects to keep in mind about Budget Policies:
 ■ A Budget Policy is very different from Budgets (AWS | Azure | GCP). We will 
cover Budgets in Step 2: Cost Reporting.
 ■ Budget Policies exist at the account level, but they can be created and 
managed from a workspace. Admins can restrict which workspaces a 
policy applies to by binding it to specific workspaces. 
 ■ A Budget Policy only applies to serverless workloads. Currently, at the 
time of writing this chapter, it applies to notebooks, jobs, pipelines, serving 
endpoints, apps and Vector Search endpoints. 
 ■ Let’s take an example of jobs having a couple of tasks. Each task can have 
its own compute, while BP tags are assigned at the job level (and not at the 
task level). So, there is a possibility that one task runs on serverless while 
the other runs on general non-serverless compute. Let’s see how Budget 
Policy tags would behave in the following scenarios:
 ■ Case 1: Both tasks run on serverless
 ■ In this case, BP tags would propagate to system tables
 ■ Case 2: Only one task runs on serverless
 ■ In this case, BP tags would also propagate to system tables for the 
serverless compute usage, while the classic compute billing record 
inherits tags from the cluster definition
 ■ Case 3: Both tasks run on non-serverless compute
 ■ In this case, BP tags would not propagate to the system tables
With Terraform:
BASH
resource "databricks_budget_policy" "this" {
  policy_name = "default-policy"
  custom_tags = [
    {
      key   = "ServerlessPolicy"
      value = "default-policy"
    },
    {
      key   = "Environment"
      value = "prod"
    },
    {
      key   = "CostCenter"
      value = "CC1234"
    },
  ]
  # Optional list of workspaces this policy is bound to.
  # Empty list means this policy is open to any workspace in the 
account.
  binding_workspace_ids = [
    databricks_mws_workspaces.prod.workspace_id
  ]
}
32
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Best practices related to tags SAMPLE TAG - KEY: VALUE PAIRINGS
Step 2: Cost reporting
SYSTEM TABLES
Next is cost reporting, or the ability to monitor costs with the context provided 
by Step 1. Databricks provides built-in system tables, like system.billing.
usage, which is the foundation for cost reporting. System tables are also useful 
when customers want to customize their reporting solution.
For example, the account usage dashboard you’ll see next is the Databricks AI/
BI dashboard, so you can view all the queries and customize the dashboard 
to fit your needs very easily. If you need to write ad hoc queries against your 
Databricks usage, with very specific filters, this is at your disposal.
 ■ It’s recommended that everyone apply General Keys. For organizations 
that want more granular insights, they should apply high-specificity keys 
that are right for their organization.
 ■ A business policy should be developed and shared among all users 
regarding the fixed keys and values that you want to enforce across  
your organization. In Step 4, we will see how Compute Policies are  
used to systematically control allowed values for tags and require tags  
in the right spots.
 ■ Tags are case-sensitive. Use consistent and readable casing styles such  
as Title Case, PascalCase or kebab-case.
 ■ For initial tagging compliance, consider building a scheduled job that 
queries tags and reports any misalignments with your organization’s policy.
 ■ It is recommended that every user have permission to at least one budget 
policy. That way, whenever the user creates a notebook/job/pipeline/etc., 
using serverless compute, the assigned BP is automatically applied.
KEY BUSINESS UNIT KEY PROJECT
Value
101 (finance)
Value
Armadillo
102 (legal) BlueBird
103 (product) Rhino
104 (sales) Dolphin
105 (field engineering) Lion
106 (marketing) Eagle
33
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
THE ACCOUNT USAGE DASHBOARD
Once you have started tagging your resources and attributing costs to their cost 
centers, teams, projects or environments, you can begin to discover the areas 
where costs are the highest. Databricks provides a usage dashboard you can 
simply import to your workspace as an AI/BI dashboard, providing immediate 
out-of-the-box cost reporting.
A new version version 2.0 of this dashboard is available for preview, with several 
improvements shown below. Even if you have previously imported the Account 
Usage dashboard, please import the new version from GitHub today!
This dashboard provides a ton of useful information and visualizations, including 
data like the following:
 ■ Usage overview, highlighting total usage trends over time, and by groups 
like SKUs and workspaces
 ■ Top N usage that ranks top usage by selected billable objects such as job_
id, warehouse_id, cluster_id, endpoint_id, etc.
 ■ Usage analysis based on tags (the more tagging you do per Step 1, the 
more useful this will be)
 ■ AI forecasts that indicate what your spending will be in the coming weeks  
and months
The dashboard also allows you to filter by date ranges, workspaces, products 
and even enter custom discounts for private rates. With so much packed into 
this dashboard, it really is your primary one-stop shop for most of your cost 
reporting needs.
34
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
JOBS MONITORING DASHBOARD
For Lakeflow Jobs, we recommend the Jobs System Tables AI/BI Dashboard 
to quickly see potential resource-based costs, as well as opportunities for 
optimization, such as:
 ■ Top 25 jobs by potential savings per month
 ■ Top 10 jobs with lowest avg CPU utilization
 ■ Top 10 jobs with highest avg memory utilization
 ■ Jobs with fixed number of workers last 30 days
 ■ Jobs running on outdated DBR version Last 30 days
DBSQL MONITORING
For enhanced monitoring of Databricks SQL, refer to our SQL SME blog here. In 
this guide, our SQL experts will walk you through the Granular Cost Monitoring 
dashboard you can set up today to see SQL costs by user, source and even 
query-level costs.
35
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
MODEL SERVING
Likewise, we have a specialized dashboard for monitoring costs for Model 
Serving. This is helpful for more granular reporting on batch inference, pay-per-
token usage, provisioned throughput endpoints and more. For more information, 
see this related blog.
BUDGET ALERTS
Beyond Serverless Budget Policies for tagging serverless compute usage, 
Databricks offers Budgets (AWS | Azure | GCP) as a distinct feature for managing 
account-level spend. Budgets can be used to track account-wide spending or 
apply filters to track the spending of specific teams, projects or workspaces.
With budgets, you specify the workspaces or tags to match, set an amount in 
USD and define recipients to be notified when the budget is exceeded. This can 
be useful to reactively alert users when their spending has exceeded a given 
amount. Please note that budgets use the list price of the SKU.
36
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Step 3: Cost controls
Next, teams must have the ability to set guardrails for data teams to be both 
self-sufficient and cost-conscious at the same time. Databricks simplifies this for 
both administrators and practitioners with Compute Policies (AWS | Azure | GCP).
Several attributes can be controlled with compute policies, including all cluster 
attributes as well as important virtual attributes such as dbu_per_user. We’ll 
review a few of the key attributes to govern for cost control, specifically:
LIMITING DBU PER USER AND MAX CLUSTERS PER USER
Often, when creating compute policies to enable self-service cluster creation  
for teams, we want to control the maximum spending of those users. This is 
where one of the most important policy attributes for cost control applies: 
dbus_per_hour.
dbus_per_hour can be used with a range policy type to set lower and upper 
bounds on DBU cost of clusters that users can create. However, this only 
enforces max DBU per cluster that uses the policy. A single user with permission 
to this policy could still create many clusters and each is capped at the specified 
DBU limit.
To take this further, and prevent an unlimited number of clusters being created 
by each user, we can use another setting, max_clusters_by_user. This is 
actually a setting on the top-level compute policy rather than an attribute you 
would find in the policy definition.
CONTROL ALL-PURPOSE VS. JOB CLUSTERS
Policies should enforce which cluster type it can be used for, using the  
cluster_type virtual attribute, which can be one of: “all-purpose”, “job” or “dlt”. 
We recommend using fixed type to enforce exactly the cluster type that the 
policy is designed for when writing it:
A common pattern is to create separate policies for jobs and pipelines versus 
all-purpose clusters, setting max_clusters_by_user to 1 for all-purpose clusters 
(e.g., how the Databricks default Personal Compute policy is defined) and 
allowing more clusters per user for jobs.
JAVASCRIPT
"dbus_per_hour": {
   "type": "range",
   "maxValue": 100
}
JAVASCRIPT
"cluster_type": {"type": "fixed", "value": "job"}
37
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
ENFORCE INSTANCE TYPES
VM instance types can be conveniently controlled with the allowlist or regex  
type. This allows users to create clusters with some flexibility in the instance 
type without being able to choose sizes that may be too expensive or outside 
their budget.
ENFORCE LATEST DATABRICKS RUNTIMES
It’s important to stay up-to-date with newer Databricks Runtimes (DBRs) and, for 
extended support periods, consider Long-Term Support (LTS) releases. Compute 
policies have several special values to easily enforce this in the spark_version 
attribute, and here are a few to be aware of:
 ■ auto:latest-lts: Maps to the latest long-term support (LTS) Databricks 
Runtime version
 ■ auto:latest-lts-ml: Maps to the latest LTS Databricks Runtime  
ML version
 ■ Or auto:latest and auto:latest-ml for the latest Generally  
Available (GA) Databricks Runtime version (or ML, respectively),  
which may not be LTS
 ■ Note: These options may be useful if you need access to the latest 
features before they reach LTS
We recommend controlling the spark_version in your policy using  
an allowlist type:
JAVASCRIPT
"node_type_id": {
   "type": "allowlist",
   "values": [
       "i3.xlarge",
       "i3.2xlarge",
       "i3.4xlarge"
   ],
   "defaultValue": "i3.xlarge"
},
"driver_node_type_id": {
   "type": "regex",
   "pattern": "[rmci][3-7][dg]?.[2-4]?xlarge"
}
JAVASCRIPT
"spark_version": {
   "type": "allowlist",
   "values": [
       "auto:latest-lts",
       "auto:latest-lts-ml",
       "auto:latest",
       "auto:latest-ml"
   ],
   "defaultValue": "auto:latest-lts"
}
38
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
SPOT INSTANCES
Cloud attributes can also be controlled in the policy, such as enforcing instance 
availability of spot instances with fallback to on-demand. Note that whenever 
using spot instances, you should always configure the “first_on_demand” to at 
least 1 so the driver node of the cluster is always on-demand.
On AWS:
ENFORCE TAGGING
As seen earlier, tagging is crucial to an organization’s ability to allocate cost and 
report it at granular levels. There are two things to consider when enforcing 
consistent tags in Databricks:
1. Compute policy controlling the custom_tags. attribute
2. For serverless, use Serverless Budget Policies as we discussed in Step 1
In the compute policy, we can control multiple custom tags by suffixing them 
with the tag name. It is recommended to use as many fixed tags as possible to 
reduce manual input from users, but allowlist is excellent for allowing multiple 
choices yet keeping values consistent.
On Azure:
On GCP (note: GCP cannot currently support the first_on_demand attribute):
JAVASCRIPT
"aws_attributes.first_on_demand": { "type": "fixed", "value": 1 },
"aws_attributes.availability": { "type": "fixed", "value": "SPOT_
WITH_FALLBACK" }
JAVASCRIPT
{"custom_tags.cost_center": {"type":"allowlist", "values":["9999", 
"9921", "9531" ]}},
{"custom_tags.environment": {"type":"fixed", "value":"dev"}}
JAVASCRIPT
"azure_attributes.first_on_demand": { "type": "fixed", "value": 1},
"azure_attributes.availability": { "type": "fixed", "value":
"SPOT_WITH_FALLBACK_AZURE" }
JAVASCRIPT
"gcp_attributes.availability": { "type" :"fixed", "value": 
"PREEMPTIBLE_WITH_FALLBACK_GCP" }
39
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
QUERY TIMEOUT FOR WAREHOUSES
Long-running SQL queries can be very expensive and even disrupt other queries 
if too many begin to queue up. Long-running SQL queries are usually due to 
unoptimized queries (poor filters or even no filters) or unoptimized tables.
Admins can control for this by configuring the Statement Timeout at the 
workspace level. To set a workspace-level timeout, go to the workspace admin 
settings, click Compute, then click Manage next to SQL warehouses. In the SQL 
Configuration Parameters setting, add a configuration parameter where the 
timeout value is in seconds.
MODEL RATE LIMITS
ML models and LLMs can also be abused with too many requests, incurring 
unexpected costs. Databricks provides usage tracking and rate limits with an 
easy-to-use AI Gateway on model serving endpoints.
You can set rate limits on the endpoint as a whole or per user. This can be 
configured with the Databricks UI, SDK, API or Terraform. For example, we can 
deploy a Foundation Model endpoint with a rate limit using Terraform:
PRACTICAL COMPUTE POLICY EXAMPLES
For more examples of real-world compute policies, see our Solution Accelerator 
here: https://github.com/databricks-industry-solutions/cluster-policy
SQL
-- Set a workspace-level timeout of 3600 seconds (1 hour)
STATEMENT_TIMEOUT 3600
BASH
resource "databricks_model_serving" "llama_3_2_3b" {
 name = "llama_3_2_3b_instruct"
 ai_gateway {
   usage_tracking_config {
     enabled = true
   }
   # Rate limit the endpoint to 10 QPM
   rate_limits {
     calls = 10
     key   = "endpoint"
     renewal_period = "minute"
   }
 }
 config {
   served_entities {
     name                       = "meta_llama_v3_2_3b_instruct-3"
     entity_name                = "system.ai.llama_v3_2_3b_instruct"
     entity_version             = "2"
     scale_to_zero_enabled      = true
     max_provisioned_throughput = 44000
   }
 }
}
40
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Step 4: Cost optimization
Lastly, we will look at some optimizations you can check for in your workspace, 
clusters and storage layers. Most of these can be checked and implemented 
automatically, which we’ll explore. Several optimizations take place at the 
compute level. These include actions such as right-sizing the VM instance type, 
knowing when to use Photon or not, the appropriate selection of compute type 
and more.
CHOOSING OPTIMAL RESOURCES
 ■ Use job compute instead of all-purpose (we’ll cover this more  
in depth next)
 ■ Use SQL warehouses for SQL -only workloads for the best cost-efficiency
 ■ Use up-to-date runtimes to receive the latest patches and performance 
improvements. For example, DBR 17.0 takes the leap to Spark 4.0 (blog) 
which includes many performance optimizations.
 ■ Use Serverless for quicker startup, termination, and better total cost of 
ownership (TCO)
 ■ Use autoscaling workers, unless using continuous streaming or the 
AvailableNow trigger
 ■ There are also advances in Spark Declarative Pipelines where 
autoscaling works well for streaming workloads thanks to a feature 
called Enhanced Autoscaling (AWS | Azure | GCP)
 ■ Choose the correct VM instance type:
 ■ Newer generation instance types and modern processor architectures 
usually perform better and often at a lower cost. For example, on AWS, 
Databricks prefers Graviton-enabled VMs (e.g. c7g.xlarge instead of c7i.
xlarge). These may yield up to 3x better price-to-performance (blog). 
 ■ Memory-optimized for most ML workloads, e.g., r7g.2xlarge
 ■ Compute-optimized for streaming workloads, e.g., c6i.4xlarge
 ■ Storage-optimized for workloads that benefit from disk caching (ad hoc 
and interactive data analysis), e.g., i4g.xlarge and c7gd.2xlarge
 ■ Only use GPU instances for workloads that use GPU-accelerated 
libraries. Furthermore, unless performing distributed training, clusters 
should be single node.
 ■ General purpose otherwise, e.g., m7g.xlarge
 ■ Use Spot or Spot Fleet instances in lower environments like Dev  
and Stage
41
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
SQL
with clusters AS (
 SELECT
   *,
   ROW_NUMBER() OVER(PARTITION BY workspace_id, cluster_id ORDER BY 
change_time DESC) as rn
 FROM system.compute.clusters
 WHERE cluster_source="UI"
 QUALIFY rn=1
),
job_tasks_exploded AS (
 SELECT
   workspace_id,
   job_id,
   EXPLODE(compute_ids) as cluster_id
 FROM system.lakeflow.job_task_run_timeline
 WHERE period_start_time >= CURRENT_DATE() - INTERVAL 30 DAY
),
all_purpose_cluster_jobs AS (
   SELECT
   t1.*,
   t2.cluster_name,
   t2.owned_by,
   t2.dbr_version
 FROM job_tasks_exploded t1
   INNER JOIN clusters t2 USING (workspace_id, cluster_id)
),
most_recent_jobs as (
 SELECT
   *,
   ROW_NUMBER() OVER(PARTITION BY workspace_id, job_id ORDER BY 
change_time DESC) as rn
 FROM
   system.lakeflow.jobs QUALIFY rn=1
)
SELECT
 t1.workspace_id,
 t1.job_id,
 first(t2.name, TRUE) as name,
 array_size(collect_list(t1.cluster_id)) as task_runs,
 collect_set(
   named_struct(  
     'cluster_id', t1.cluster_id,
     'cluster_name', t1.cluster_name
   )
 ) as clusters_list
FROM all_purpose_cluster_jobs t1
 LEFT JOIN most_recent_jobs t2 USING (workspace_id, job_id)
GROUP BY t1.workspace_id, t1.job_id
ORDER BY task_runs DESC
LIMIT 100;
AVOID RUNNING JOBS ON ALL-PURPOSE COMPUTE
As mentioned in Cost Controls, cluster costs can be optimized by running 
automated jobs with Job Compute, not All-Purpose Compute. Exact pricing may 
depend on promotions and active discounts, but Job Compute is typically 2-3x 
cheaper than All-Purpose.
Job Compute also provides new compute instances each time, isolating 
workloads from one another, while still permitting multitask workflows to reuse 
the compute resources for all tasks if desired. See how to configure compute for 
jobs (AWS | Azure | GCP).
Using Databricks system tables, the following query can be used to find jobs 
running on interactive All-Purpose clusters. This is also included as part of the 
Jobs System Tables AI/BI Dashboard you can easily import to your workspace.
42
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
MONITOR PHOTON FOR ALL-PURPOSE CLUSTERS AND 
CONTINUOUS JOBS
Photon is an optimized vectorized engine for Spark on the Databricks Data 
Intelligence Platform that provides extremely fast query performance. Photon 
increases the amount of DBUs the cluster costs by a multiple of 2.9x for job 
clusters, and approximately 2x for All-Purpose clusters. Despite the DBU 
multiplier, Photon can yield a lower overall TCO for jobs by reducing the  
runtime duration.
Interactive clusters, on the other hand, may have significant amounts of idle time 
when users are not running commands. Please ensure all-purpose clusters have 
the auto-termination setting applied to minimize this idle compute cost. While 
not always the case, this may result in higher costs with Photon. This also makes 
Serverless notebooks a great fit, as they minimize idle spend, run with Photon for 
the best performance and can spin up the session in just a few seconds.
Similarly, Photon isn’t always beneficial for continuous streaming jobs that are 
up 24/7. Monitor whether you can reduce the number of worker nodes required 
when using Photon, as this lowers TCO; otherwise, Photon may not be a good fit 
for continuous jobs.
Note: The following query can be used to find interactive clusters that are 
configured with Photon:
SQL
-- Find interactive clusters using Photon
SELECT
  "Photon Usage" cost_saving_opportunity,
  u.usage_metadata.cluster_id,
  c.cluster_name,
  u.sku_name,
  c.dbr_version,
  u.billing_origin_product,
  c.owned_by,
  usage_date,
  ROUND(SUM(usage_quantity), 2) as sum_usage_quantity,
  usage_unit
FROM
  system.billing.usage u
    LEFT JOIN system.compute.clusters c
      ON c.cluster_id = u.usage_metadata.cluster_id
WHERE
  c.delete_time IS NULL
  AND c.cluster_id IS NOT NULL
  AND (
    u.product_features.is_photon = true
    AND u.product_features.sql_tier IS NULL
    AND u.billing_origin_product = 'ALL_PURPOSE'
  )
GROUP BY
  usage_metadata.cluster_id,
  u.product_features,
  u.sku_name,
  c.cluster_name,
  c.dbr_version,
  u.billing_origin_product,
  c.owned_by,
  usage_date,
  usage_unit
ORDER BY
  sum_usage_quantity DESC,
  usage_date
43
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
OPTIMIZING DATA STORAGE AND PIPELINES
There are too many strategies for optimizing data, storage and Spark to cover 
here. Fortunately, Databricks has compiled these into the Comprehensive Guide 
to Optimize Databricks, Spark and Delta Lake Workloads, covering everything 
from data layout and skew to optimizing delta merges and more.
Real-world application
ORGANIZATION BEST PRACTICES
Organizational structure and ownership best practices are just as important as 
the technical solutions we will go through next.
Digital natives running highly effective FinOps practices that include the 
Databricks Platform usually prioritize the following within the organization:
 ■ Clear ownership for platform administration and monitoring
 ■ Consideration of solution costs before, during and after projects
 ■ Culture of continuous improvement — always optimizing
These are some of the most successful organizational structures for FinOps:
 ■ Centralized (e.g., center of excellence, hub-and-spoke)
 ■ This may take the form of a central platform or data team responsible 
for FinOps and distributing policies, controls, and tools to other teams 
from there
 ■ Hybrid/distributed budget centers
 ■ Disperses the centralized model out to different domain-specific 
teams. May have one or more admins delegated to that domain/team 
to align larger platform and FinOps practices with localized processes 
and priorities.
CENTER OF EXCELLENCE EXAMPLE
A center of excellence has many benefits, such as centralizing core platform 
administration and empowering business units with safe, reusable assets such as 
policies and bundle templates.
The center of excellence often puts teams such as Data Platform, Platform 
Engineer or Data Ops at the center, or “hub,” in a hub-and-spoke model. This 
team is responsible for allocating and reporting costs with the Usage Dashboard. 
To deliver an optimal and cost-aware self-service environment for teams, the 
platform team should create compute policies and budget policies that can 
be tailored to use cases and business units (the ”spokes”). While not required, 
we recommend managing these artifacts with Terraform and VCS for strong 
consistency, versioning and the ability to modularize.
44
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Key takeaways
This has been a fairly exhaustive guide to help you take control of your costs with 
Databricks and we have covered several things along the way. To recap, the crawl, 
walk, run journey is this: 
 ■ Cost attribution
 ■ Cost reporting
 ■ Cost controls
 ■ Cost optimization
Finally, to recap some of the most important takeaways:
 ■ Solid tagging is the foundation of all good cost attribution and reporting.
Use Compute Policies to enforce high-quality tags.
 ■ Import the Usage Dashboard for your main stop when it comes to 
reporting and forecasting Databricks spending
 ■ Import the Jobs System Tables AI/BI Dashboard to monitor and find jobs 
with cost-saving opportunities
 ■ Use Compute Policies to enforce cost controls and resource limits on 
cluster creations
Next steps
Get started today and create your first Compute Policy, or use one of our policy 
examples. Then, import the Usage Dashboard as your main stop for reporting 
and forecasting Databricks spending. Check off optimizations from Step 3 we 
shared earlier for your clusters, workspaces, and data.
Databricks Delivery Solutions Architects (DSAs) accelerate data and AI 
initiatives across organizations. They provide architectural leadership, optimize 
platforms for cost and performance, enhance developer experience and drive 
successful project execution. DSAs bridge the gap between initial deployment 
and production-grade solutions — working closely with various teams, including 
data engineering, technical leads, executives and other stakeholders to ensure 
tailored solutions and faster time to value. To benefit from a custom execution 
plan, strategic guidance and support throughout your data and AI journey from a 
DSA, please contact your Databricks Account Team.
45
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Lakeflow Connect: Efficient and Easy  
Data Ingestion Using the Microsoft SQL 
Server Connector
Explore Databricks Lakeflow Connect’s fully managed SQL Server 
Connector to simplify ingesting and integrating data seamlessly 
with Databricks tools for data processing and analytics.
By Andrea Tardif, Prasanna Selvaraj, Hector Bustamante  
and Phanitha Kommareddi
Complexities of extracting SQL server data 
While digital native companies recognize AI's critical role in driving innovation, 
many still face challenges in making their data readily available for downstream 
uses, such as machine learning development and advanced analytics. For 
these organizations, supporting business teams that rely on the SQL Server 
means having data engineering resources and maintaining custom connectors, 
preparing data for analytics and ensuring it is available to data teams for model 
development. Often, this data needs to be enriched with additional sources and 
transformed before it can inform data-driven decisions.
Maintaining these processes quickly becomes complex and brittle, slowing down 
innovation. That’s why Databricks developed Lakeflow Connect, which includes 
built-in data connectors for popular databases, enterprise applications and file 
sources. These connectors provide efficient end-to-end, incremental ingestion, 
are flexible and easy to set up, and are fully integrated with the Databricks Data 
Intelligence Platform for unified governance, observability and orchestration. 
The new SQL Server connector from Lakeflow Connect is the first database 
connector with robust integration for both on-premises and cloud databases to 
help derive data insights within Databricks.
In this chapter, we’ll review the key considerations for when to use Lakeflow 
Connect for SQL Server and explain how to configure the connector to replicate 
data from an Azure SQL Server instance. Then, we’ll review a specific use case, 
best practices and how to get started.
Key architectural considerations
Below are the key considerations to help decide when to use the SQL  
Server connector.
Region compatibility AWS | Azure | GCP
Serverless compute ✓
Change data capture and change tracking integration ✓
Unity Catalog compatibility ✓
Private networking security requirements ✓
46
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
REGION AND FEATURE COMPATIBILITY 
Lakeflow Connect supports a wide range of SQL Server database  
variations, including: 
 ■ Microsoft Azure SQL Database
 ■ Microsoft Azure SQL Managed Instance
 ■ Amazon RDS for SQL Server
 ■ SQL Server on GCP
 ■ Microsoft SQL Server running on Azure VMs and Amazon EC2
 ■ On-premises SQL Server accessed through Azure ExpressRoute  
or AWS Direct Connect
Since Lakeflow Connect runs on serverless pipelines under the hood, built-
in features such as pipeline observability, event log alerting and lakehouse 
monitoring can be leveraged. If Serverless is not supported in your region,  
work with your Databricks Account Team to request help prioritizing 
development or deployment in that region. 
Lakeflow Connect is built on the Data Intelligence Platform, which provides 
seamless integration with Unity Catalog to reuse established permissions and 
access controls across new SQL Server sources for unified governance. If your 
Databricks tables and views are on Hive, we recommend upgrading them to UC 
to benefit from these features (AWS | Azure | GCP).
CHANGE DATA REQUIREMENTS 
Lakeflow Connect can be integrated with SQL Server with change  
tracking (CT) or change data capture (CDC) enabled to support efficient, 
incremental ingestion. 
CDC provides historical change information about insert, update and  
delete operations, and when the actual data has changed. Change tracking 
identifies which rows were modified in a table without capturing the actual  
data changes themselves. Learn more about CDC and the benefits of using  
CDC with SQL Server.
Databricks recommends using change tracking for any table with a primary key 
to minimize the load on the source database. For source tables without a primary 
key, use CDC. Learn more about when to use it here.
The SQL Server connector captures an initial load of historical data on the first 
run of your ingestion pipeline. Then, the connector tracks and ingests only the 
changes made to the data since the last run, leveraging SQL Server's CT/CDC 
features to streamline operations and efficiency.
47
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
GOVERNANCE AND PRIVATE NETWORKING SECURITY 
When a connection is established with the SQL Server using Lakeflow Connect: 
 ■ Traffic between the client interface and the control plane is encrypted  
in transit using TLS 1.2 or later
 ■ The staging volume, where raw files are stored during ingestion,  
is encrypted by the underlying cloud storage provider
 ■ Data at rest is protected following best practices and  
compliance standards 
 ■ When configured with private endpoints, all data traffic stays within the 
cloud provider's private network, avoiding the public internet
Once the data is ingested into Databricks, it is encrypted like other datasets 
within UC. The ingestion gateway that extracts snapshots, change logs and 
metadata from the source database lands in a UC Volume, a storage abstraction 
best for registering non-tabular datasets such as JSON files. This UC Volume 
resides within the customer’s cloud storage account within their Virtual Networks 
or Virtual Private Clouds.
Additionally, UC enforces fine-grained access controls and maintains audit 
trails to govern access to this newly ingested data. UC Service credentials 
and Storage Credentials are stored as securable objects within UC, ensuring 
secure and centralized authentication management. These credentials are never 
exposed in logs or hardcoded into SQL ingestion pipelines, providing robust 
protection and access control.
If your organization meets the above criteria, consider Lakeflow Connect for SQL 
Server to help simplify data ingestion into Databricks.
Breakdown of technical solution
Next, review the steps for configuring Lakeflow Connect for the SQL Server and 
replicating data from an Azure SQL Server instance.
CONFIGURE UNITY CATALOG PERMISSIONS
Within Databricks, ensure serverless compute is enabled for notebooks, 
workflows and pipelines (AWS | Azure | GCP). Then, validate that the user or 
service principal creating the ingestion pipeline has the following UC permissions: 
Permission type Reason Documentation 
CREATE CONNECTION 
on the metastore 
Lakeflow Connect needs to 
establish a secure connection 
to the SQL Server.
CREATE 
CONNECTION
USE CATALOG on the 
target catalog 
Required as it provides access 
to the catalog where Lakeflow 
Connect will land the SQL 
Server data tables in UC.
USE CATALOG
USE SCHEMA, CREATE 
TABLE and CREATE 
VOLUME on an 
existing schema or 
CREATE SCHEMA on 
the target catalog
Provides the necessary rights 
to access schemas and create 
storage locations for ingested 
data tables.
GRANT 
PRIVILEGES  
Unrestricted 
permissions to create 
clusters, or a custom 
compute policy
Required to spin up the 
compute resources required 
for the gateway ingestion 
process.
MANAGE 
COMPUTE 
POLICIES
48
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
SET UP AZURE SQL SERVER
To use the SQL Server connector, confirm that the following requirements  
are met:
 ■ Confirm SQL version
 ■ SQL Server 2012 or a later version must be enabled to use change 
tracking. However, 2016+ is recommended. Review SQL version 
requirements here.
 ■ Configure the database service account dedicated to the  
Databricks ingestion. 
 ■ Validate privilege requirements based on cloud (AWS | Azure | GCP)
 ■ Enable change tracking or built-in CDC 
 ■ You must have SQL Server 2012 or a later version to use CDC. Versions 
earlier than SQL Server 2016 additionally require the Enterprise edition.
EXAMPLE: INGESTING FROM AZURE SQL SERVER  
TO DATABRICKS
Next, we will ingest a table from an Azure SQL Server database to Databricks 
using Lakeflow Connect. In this example, CDC and CT provide an overview of all 
available options. Since the table in this example has a primary key, CT could 
have been the primary choice. However, since there is only one small table in this 
example, there is no concern about load overhead, so CDC was also included.  
It is recommended to review when to use CDC, CT, or both to determine which  
is best for your data and refresh requirements.
1. [Azure SQL Server] Verify and configure Azure SQL Server  
for CDC and CT
Start by accessing the Azure portal and signing in with your Azure account 
credentials. On the left-hand side, click All services and search for SQL 
Servers. Find and click your server, then click the Query Editor. In this example, 
sqlserver01 was selected. 
The screenshot below shows that the SQL Server database has one table  
called “‘drivers.”
Azure SQL Server UI — No CDC or CT enabled
Before replicating the data to Databricks, either CDC, CT or both must 
be enabled.
For this example, the following script is run on the database to enable CT:
SQL
ALTER DATABASE sqlserver01 SET CHANGE_TRACKING = ON (CHANGE_RENTION 
= 3 DAYS, AUTO_CLEANUP = ON);
49
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
This command enables change tracking for the database with the  
following parameters:
 ■ CHANGE_RETENTION = 3 DAYS: This value tracks changes for three days 
(72 hours). A full refresh will be required if your gateway is offline longer 
than the set time. It is recommended that this value be increased if more 
extended outages are expected.
 ■ AUTO_CLEANUP = ON: This is the default setting. To maintain  
performance, it automatically removes change tracking data older  
than the retention period.
Then, the following script is run on the database to enable CDC:
When both scripts finish running, review the tables section under the SQL Server 
instance in Azure and ensure that all CDC and CT tables are created. 
2. [Databricks] Configure the SQL Server connector  
in Lakeflow Connect
In this next step, the Databricks UI will be shown to configure the SQL Server 
connector. Alternatively, Databricks Asset Bundles, a programmatic way to 
manage the Lakeflow Connect pipelines as code, can also be leveraged. An 
example of the full DABs script is in the appendix below.
Once all the permissions are set, as laid out in the Permission Prerequisites 
section, you are ready to ingest data. Click the + New button at the top left, then 
select Add or Upload data. 
Databricks UI — Add Data
Azure SQL Server UI — CDC enabled
YAML
EXEC sys.sp_cdc_enable_table
@source_schema = N'MySchema',
@source_name   = N'MyTable',
@role_name     = NULL,
@supports_net_changes = 1
50
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Then select the SQL Server option.
The SQL Server connector is configured in several steps. 
1. Set up the ingestion gateway (AWS | Azure | GCP). In this step, provide a 
name for the ingestion gateway pipeline and a catalog and schema for 
the UC Volume location to extract snapshots and continually change data 
from the source database.
2. Configure the ingestion pipeline. This replicates the CDC/CT data source 
and the schema evolution events. A SQL Server connection is required, 
which is created through the UI following these steps or with the following 
SQL code below:
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector: Ingestion Gateway
YAML
CREATE CONNECTION rebel
    TYPE SQLSERVER
    OPTIONS (
      host 'rebel.database.windows.net',
      port '1433',
      user '<username>',
      password '<password>');
For this example, name the SQL server connection rebel as shown.
51
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
3. Selecting the SQL Server tables for replication. Select the whole schema to 
be ingested into Databricks instead of choosing individual tables to ingest.
The whole schema can be ingested into Databricks during initial exploration or 
migrations. If the schema is large or exceeds the allowed number of tables per 
pipeline (see connector limits), Databricks recommends splitting the ingestion 
across multiple pipelines to maintain optimal performance. For use case-specific 
workflows such as a single ML model, dashboard, or report, it’s generally more 
efficient to ingest individual tables tailored to that specific need, rather than the 
whole schema.
4. Configure the destination where the SQL Server tables will be replicated 
within UC. Select the main catalog and sqlserver01 schema to land the 
data in UC.
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector: Ingestion Pipeline
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector: Source
52
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector: Destination
Databricks UI — Lakeflow Connect Pipeline
5. Configure schedules and notifications (AWS | Azure | GCP). This final step 
will help determine how often to run the pipeline and where success or 
failure messages should be sent. Set the pipeline to run every six hours 
and notify the user only of pipeline failures. This interval can be configured 
to meet the needs of your workload.
The ingestion pipeline can be triggered on a custom schedule. Lakeflow Connect 
will automatically create a dedicated job for each scheduled pipeline trigger. The 
ingestion pipeline is a task within the job. Optionally, more tasks can be added 
before or after the ingestion task for any downstream processing.
After this step, the ingestion pipeline is saved and triggered, starting a full data 
load from the SQL Server into Databricks.
Databricks UI — SQL Server Connector: Settings
53
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
3. [Databricks] Validate successful runs of the gateway and 
ingestion pipelines
Navigate to the Pipeline menu to check if the gateway ingestion pipeline is 
running. Once complete, search for ‘update_progress’ within the pipeline event 
log interface at the bottom pane to ensure the gateway successfully ingests the 
source data.
To check the sync status, navigate to the pipeline menu. The screenshot below 
shows that the ingestion pipeline has performed three insert and update 
(UPSERT) operations.
Navigate to the target catalog, main, and schema, sqlserver01, to view the 
replicated table, as shown below.Databricks Pipeline UI — Pipeline Event Log: ‘update_progress’
Databricks Pipeline UI — Validate Insert and Update Operations
Databricks UC — Replicated Target Table
54
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
4. [Databricks] Test CDC and Schema Evolution
Next, verify a CDC event by performing insert, update and delete operations 
in the source table. The screenshot of the Azure SQL Server below depicts the 
three events.
Once the pipeline is triggered and is completed, query the delta table under the 
target schema and verify the changes.
Azure SQL Server UI — Insert Rows
Databricks SQL UI — View Inserted Rows
SQL
INSERT INTO dbo.drivers (driver_name, license_number, license_
expiry_date, status, phone_number, address)
VALUES ('Jack William', 'DKL236', '2026-12-31', 'Active', '567-456-
4344', '123 Water St, City, State');
update [dbo].[drivers] 
set license_number = 'SDF456' 
where driver_id = 1;
delete from [dbo].[drivers] 
where driver_id = 2;
SELECT * FROM [dbo].[drivers];
SQL
SELECT * 
FROM main.sqlserver01.drivers
Similarly, let's perform a schema evolution event and add a column to the SQL 
Server source table, as shown below:
SQL
ALTER TABLE dbu.drivers
ADD email VARCHAR(100) NULL;
SELECT * FROM [dbo].[drivers]
55
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
After changing the sources, trigger the ingestion pipeline by clicking the start 
button within the Spark Declarative Pipelines UI. Once the pipeline has been 
completed, verify the changes by browsing the target table, as shown below.  
The new column email will be appended to the end of the drivers table.
5. [Databricks] Continuous pipeline monitoring 
Monitoring their health and behavior is crucial once the ingestion and gateway 
pipelines are successfully running. The pipeline UI provides data quality checks, 
pipeline progress and data lineage information. To view the event log entries in 
the pipeline UI, locate the bottom pane under the pipeline DAG, as shown below.
Azure SQL Server UI — Schema Evolution
Databricks UC — View Schema Change
Databricks Pipeline Event Log UI
56
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Databricks Pipeline Event Log Details — JSON
The event log entry above shows that the ‘drives_snapshot_flow’ was ingested 
from the SQL Server and completed. The maturity level of STABLE indicates that 
the schema is stable and has not changed. More information on the event log 
schema can be found here.
57
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Challenges → Solutions
A large-scale medical diagnostic lab using Databricks faced challenges efficiently 
ingesting SQL Server data into its lakehouse. Before implementing Lakeflow 
Connect, the lab used Databricks Spark notebooks to pull two tables from 
Azure SQL Server into Databricks. Their application would then interact with the 
Databricks API to manage compute and job execution. 
Recognizing that this process could be simplified, the medical diagnostic 
lab implemented Lakeflow Connect for SQL Server. Once enabled, the 
implementation was completed in just one day, allowing the medical diagnostic 
lab to leverage Databricks’ built-in tools for observability with daily incremental 
ingestion refreshes.
Operational considerations
Once the SQL Server connector has successfully established a connection to 
your Azure SQL Database, the next step is to efficiently schedule your data 
pipelines to optimize performance and resource utilization. In addition, it's 
essential to follow best practices for programmatic pipeline configuration to 
ensure scalability and consistency across environments.
PIPELINE ORCHESTRATION 
There is no limit on how often the ingestion pipeline can be scheduled to run. 
However, to minimize costs and ensure consistency in pipeline executions 
without overlap, Databricks recommends at least a five-minute interval between 
ingestion executions. This allows new data to be introduced at the source while 
accounting for computational resources and startup time. 
The ingestion pipeline can be configured as a task within a job. If downstream 
workloads rely on fresh data, you can set task dependencies to ensure the 
ingestion pipeline run completes before executing those tasks.
Additionally, suppose the pipeline is still running when the next refresh is 
scheduled. In that case, the ingestion pipeline will behave similarly to a job and 
skip the update until the next scheduled one, assuming the currently running 
update completes on time.
Real-world example
58
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
OBSERVABILITY AND COST TRACKING 
Lakeflow Connect operates on a compute-based pricing model, ensuring 
efficiency and scalability for various data integration needs. The ingestion 
pipeline operates on serverless compute, which allows for flexibility in scaling 
based on demand and simplifies management by eliminating the need for users 
to configure and manage the underlying infrastructure.
However, it's important to note that while the ingestion pipeline can run on 
serverless compute, the ingestion gateway for database connectors currently 
operates on classic compute to simplify connections to the database source. 
As a result, users might see a combination of classic and serverless Spark 
Declarative Pipelines DBU charges reflected in their billing.
The easiest way to track and monitor Lakeflow Connect usage is through 
system tables. Below is an example query to view a particular Lakeflow Connect 
pipeline’s usage:
SQL
SELECT 
  u.billing_origin_product, 
  u.usage_metadata.dlt_pipeline_id as pipeline_id,
  u.ingestion_date, 
  u.usage_date, 
  SUM(u.usage_quantity) as DBU_COUNT,
  SUM(u.usage_quantity * l.pricing.effective_list.default) as DBU_
AMOUNT
FROM system.billing.usage u
LEFT JOIN system.billing.list_prices l 
  ON u.sku_name = l.sku_name 
WHERE 
  u.billing_origin_product = 'LAKEFLOW_CONNECT' 
  AND u.usage_metadata.dlt_pipeline_id = '<dlt-pipeline-id>'
  AND u.usage_date >= '<date>' --optional
GROUP BY 
  u.billing_origin_product,
  u.usage_metadata.dlt_pipeline_id,
  u.ingestion_date, 
  u.usage_date
ORDER BY u.usage_date DESC;
Databricks SQL — System Table Query Output
59
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The official pricing for Lakeflow Connect documentation (AWS | Azure | GCP) 
provides detailed rate information. Additional costs, such as serverless egress 
fees (pricing), may apply. Egress costs from the Cloud provider for classic 
compute can be found here (AWS | Azure | GCP).
Best practices and key takeaways
Below are some of the best practices and considerations to follow when 
implementing this SQL Server connector:
1. Configure each Ingestion Gateway to authenticate with a user or entity 
with access only to the replicated source database
2. Ensure the user   is given the necessary permissions to create connections 
in UC and ingest the data
3. Utilize DABs to reliably configure Lakeflow Connect ingestion pipelines, 
ensuring repeatability and consistency in infrastructure management
4. For source tables with primary keys, enable change tracking to achieve 
lower overhead and improved performance
5. For source tables without a primary key, enable CDC due to its ability to 
capture changes at the column level, even without unique row identifiers
Lakeflow Connect for SQL Server provides a fully managed, built-in integration  
for both on-premises and cloud databases for efficient, incremental ingestion 
into Databricks.
Next steps and additional resources
Try the SQL Server connector today to help solve your data ingestion challenges. 
Follow the steps outlined in this chapter or review the documentation. Learn 
more about Lakeflow Connect on the product page, view a product tour or view 
a demo of the Salesforce connector to help predict customer churn.
Appendix
In this optional step, to manage the Lakeflow Connect pipelines as code using 
DABs, you simply need to add two files to your existing bundle:
 ■ A workflow file that controls the frequency of data ingestion  
(resources/sqlserver.yml)
 ■ A pipeline definition file (resources/sqlserver_pipeline.yml)
60
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
YAML
variables:
  # Common variables used multiple places in the DAB definition.
  gateway_name:
    default: sqlserver01-gateway-pipeline
  dest_catalog:
    default: main
  dest_schema:
    default: sqlserver01
resources:
  pipelines:
    gateway:
      name: ${var.gateway_name}
      gateway_definition:
        connection_name: rebel
        gateway_storage_catalog: main
        gateway_storage_schema: sqlserver01
        gateway_storage_name: sqlserver01-gateway-pipeline
      catalog: main
      target: sqlserver01
      channel: PREVIEW
    pipeline_sqlserver:
      name: sqlserver-ingestion-pipeline
      ingestion_definition:
        ingestion_gateway_id: ${resources.pipelines.gateway.id}
        objects:
          - schema:
              # Ingest all tables in the sqlserver01.dbo schema to 
main.dest_schema. The destination table name will be drivers, the 
same as it is on the source.
              source_catalog: sqlserver01
              source_schema: dbo
              destination_catalog: main
              destination_schema: sqlserver01
      target: sqlserver01
      catalog: main
      channel: PREVIEW
YAML
resources:
  jobs:
    sqlserver_dab_job:
      name: sqlserver-ingestion-pipeline job
      trigger:
        periodic:
          interval: 6
          unit: HOURS
      email_notifications:
        on_failure:
          - <user-email>
      tasks:
        - task_key: refresh_pipeline
          pipeline_task:
            pipeline_id: ${resources.pipelines.pipeline_sqlserver.
id}
resources/sqlserver.yml: resources/sqlserver_job.yml:
61
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Implement CDC Data Load and SCD Type 
2 With Lakeflow
By Cary Moore
Introduction
Every data warehousing project, once defined and deemed necessary, contains 
three primary tasks:
1. Ingest data from the source
2. Populate and transform data for reporting
3. Leverage Slowly Changing Dimensions Type II methodology  
(maintain history) 
Before Databricks, developers would need a separate tool for each function and 
have to maintain them, adding a lot of complexity. 
This chapter demonstrates the new Databricks Lakeflow Connect capabilities 
combined with Spark Declarative Pipelines to perform these three requirements 
for data warehousing — all in one combined package using Microsoft’s SQL 
Server as the source database.
Setting up the source database for CDC
When working with large data sets, constantly processing sources from scratch 
tends to be an expensive and time consuming affair.
Many “poor man's” change data capture (CDC) implementations, such as “Last 
Update Date,” other date filters or difference operations, are often performed 
due to a lack of control on the source database. Beyond the time and expense, 
there are also deficiencies in capturing deletes in the source data, requiring 
additional operations to determine those transactions.
When the stars align and developers are provided the capability to leverage 
change data capture in the source database, you would need a tool that can 
call the database procedure to retrieve the changed records then process them 
forward in the ETL.
Databricks now has Lakeflow Connect. With it, you can ingest the CDC records. 
You still, however, have to enable the CDC components on the source database. 
For that, you need to follow the provided steps:
 ■ Create a user in the source database that has privileges to read and 
execute the necessary procedures and change logs. Those requirements 
are specified in this documentation for SQL Server.
 ■ You will need to decide whether to use change data capture or change 
tracking. The documentation can assist in making the decision: Databricks 
requires either Microsoft change tracking or Microsoft change data 
capture (CDC) to extract data from SQL Server.
 ■ Change tracking captures the fact that rows in a table have changed,  
but doesn’t capture the actual operations. Enable change tracking  
for the tables.
 ■ CDC captures every operation on a table. Enable the built-in CDC.
62
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Creating a connection for the source database
With the database user you created for the CDC replication, you will need to 
create a connection in Databricks so the replication pipeline can connect  
to the database and perform the ingestion/replication. In this chapter, we focus  
on connecting to an Azure SQL Server instance, though we also support an on-
premises SQL Server instance with the correct network configurations (Express 
Route, etc.).
The steps are getting easier now that we are purely in the UI on Databricks. The 
following steps are in this guide, but are presented here in reprise.
Note that the UI combines the connection and the Unity Catalog’s catalog 
creation steps.
1. Using the Databricks workspace UI, create an external connection for 
the SQL Server database via the steps from Catalog > External Data > 
Connections location.
2. Provide a connection name and select the SQL Server connection type. 
This will open up additional steps. Select the “Username and password” 
Auth type (Databricks also supports OAuth). Optionally, add a comment, 
then click “Next.”
63
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
In the “Connection details” step, pick the appropriate certificate option for your 
scenario, select “Read only” for Application intent and create the connection.
Provide your connection and authentication information and continue.
64
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Specify the appropriate access and sharing parameters for this catalog by 
choosing workspaces that can use the catalog, selecting an owner and granting 
the appropriate access privileges.
Provide a catalog name to be used in Unity Catalog, and provide the SQL Server 
database name that will be mapped to our new catalog. Finally, click on “Create 
catalog.” Note that this catalog is a foreign catalog and will not be the same 
catalog that you use for pipeline operations later. 
65
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
At this point, the catalog will be created. You can then use Catalog Explorer 
to view and query the SQL Server database using federated queries through 
Lakehouse Federation.
Creating the replication pipeline
The Lakeflow Connect replication workflow is called an ingestion pipeline, which 
consists of two separate components: the gateway and the ingest pipeline.
1. The gateway pipeline: Creates a staging volume, connects to your SQL 
Server database, extracts a snapshot and change data and stores it in 
the staging volume. The gateway stores an initial seed snapshot followed 
by change data. It's recommended to run the gateway as a continuous 
pipeline to avoid gaps in change data due to change log retention policies 
on the source database.
2. The ingest pipeline: Applies the initial snapshot and subsequent change 
data from the gateway pipeline (stored in the staging volume) into 
destination streaming tables. It's important to note that only one ingestion 
pipeline per gateway is supported. If you need to write to multiple 
destination catalogs or schemas, you'll need to create multiple gateway-
ingestion pipeline pairs.
You can create the gateway and ingest pipelines using:
1. Databricks User Interface (UI)
2. Databricks Command Line Interface (CLI)
3. Databricks Asset Bundle (DAB)
4. A notebook
These are covered in the documentation, but we’ll show you the Databricks UI 
approach here for convenience. As always, check the documentation for the 
latest directions and updates.
Finally, add the necessary tags required by your organization or for your benefit 
in the metadata for the connection.
66
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
PREREQUISITES
Before creating the ingestion pipeline, you will need to select or create catalogs 
and schemas to store the staging data from the gateway pipeline and the 
destination tables created by the ingest pipeline. These are referred to as the 
“staging catalog” and the “destination catalog” in subsequent steps.
The staging and destination catalogs can be the same catalog and share the 
same schema, which is the approach shown here, but you can also create  
and use separate catalogs and schemas. The gateway stores the source 
snapshot and change data in a volume, so there is no naming collision when  
using the same catalog and schema for both the staging catalog and the 
destination catalog.
Note that the catalog created during the connection setup cannot be used, 
as that is a foreign catalog for query federation, and the ingestion requires a 
managed catalog.
CREATE THE INGESTION PIPELINE
From the catalog explorer > external data > connection page, use the “Create 
ingestion pipeline” button.
Enter a name for your ingestion gateway, as well as the staging catalog and 
schema, then continue to the next step.
67
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The second pipeline, the ingestion pipeline (part of the overall ingestion/
replication process), also requires a unique name, a connection and a destination 
catalog. You can use the same catalog as the staging data (shown here) or select 
a different catalog. Continue on to select the source tables.
After a few moments, the source database, database schema and tables (per 
your connection user’s permissions) will be displayed. Select the schema (shown 
here) or specific tables for ingestion. Selecting the schema will bring in all tables 
in that schema.
68
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The destination schema is chosen next. Select your schedule and notification 
settings for this pipeline.
Set up your schedule and notification preferences.
69
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Save and run the pipeline, or save and just close. Saving and running will launch 
both the gateway and ingest pipelines.
After a short time, this pipeline completed successfully and displayed the results 
and metrics from this run.  Checking the destination catalog and schema shows 
the two newly created tables.
70
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Creating the pipeline
We are following the Databricks Medallion architecture, with a Bronze layer 
holding the raw data from our source system, and a Silver layer containing the 
Slowly Changing Dimension Type II (SCD type 2) change tracking of the history of 
our changing business entities. We are not using a Gold layer here, as our intent 
is to show CDC and SCD type 2.
1. Bronze — The Bronze layer traditionally holds the data as it exists in the 
source system. In this case, this is the data from SQL Server created in 
step 4. These are the replicated tables, customers and transactions.
2. Silver — This layer resembles the source system, containing the cleansed 
and conformed data, including aggregations and SCD type 2 changes. The 
data here is only lightly changed, containing our Bronze data plus our SCD 
type 2 changes. 
Native SCD type 2 is on the roadmap for Databricks Lakeflow CDC. In the 
meantime, we will accomplish this using a Spark Declarative Pipeline that 
employs the “apply changes from snapshot” capability. There are different 
options available for apply_changes_from_snapshot, but we are only using a few 
in this example.
71
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
This pipeline reads from the replicated customer table and applies the changes 
from the last version into a new SCD type 2 table. Notice that in addition to the 
original columns, our SCD table now has ‘__START_AT’ and ‘__END_AT’ columns 
used to determine the ‘current’ value.
Querying the tables
1. Now, to demonstrate the SCD type 2 in action, we update our customer 
record to change the customer’s email address
2. Displaying the email address for our fictitious customer shows  
amy26@example.net
3. After updating this email in the source database to amy52@example.net 
and running the ingest and SCD type 2 pipeline gives:
This is displaying the appropriate value along with the __START_AT and __END_
AT values.
72
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Conclusion
In summary, I expect that you will find that this chapter demonstrates Databricks’ 
ability to handle data warehousing tasks, including data ingestion, transformation 
and maintaining version history, SCD type 2, all within one platform. It covers 
setting up Change Data Capture on a source database, creating connections 
and replication pipelines and implementing SCD type 2 using Spark Declarative 
Pipelines. The example shows how changes in source data are captured and 
reflected in the destination tables, including historical versions of records. 
Previously, developers were forced to use many tools to accomplish the same 
type of end-to-end tasks, but with Databricks, it is all accomplished in one open, 
unified and secure platform.
73
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Optimizing Materialized Views 
Recomputes
By Andrea Tardif and Justin Edrington
Optimize incremental computation  
of Materialized Views
While digital-native companies recognize the critical role AI plays in  
driving innovation, many still face challenges in making their ETL pipelines 
operationally efficient.
Materialized Views (MVs) exist to store precomputed query results as managed 
tables, allowing users to access complex or frequently used data much faster by 
avoiding repeated computation of the same queries.
MVs improve query performance, reduce computational costs and simplify 
transformation processes.
Spark Declarative Pipelines provide a straightforward, declarative approach to 
building data pipelines, supporting both full and incremental refreshes for MVs. 
Databricks pipelines are powered by the Enzyme engine, which efficiently keeps 
MVs up to date by tracking how new data affects the query results and only 
updating what is necessary. It utilizes an internal cost model to select among 
various techniques, including those employed in materialized views and manual 
ETL patterns commonly used.
This chapter will discuss detecting unexpected full recomputes and optimizing 
pipelines for proper incremental MV refreshes.
Key architectural considerations
SCENARIOS FOR INCREMENTAL AND FULL REFRESHES
A full recompute overwrites the results in the MV by reprocessing all available 
data from the source. This can become costly and time-consuming since it 
requires reprocessing the entire underlying dataset, even if only a small portion 
has changed.
While incremental refresh is generally preferred for efficiency, there are 
situations where a full refresh is more appropriate. Our cost model follows these 
high-level guidelines:
 ■ Use a full refresh when there are major changes in the underlying data, 
especially if records have been deleted or modified in ways that the cost 
model can efficiently compute and apply the incremental change
 ■ Use an incremental refresh when changes are relatively minor and the 
source tables are frequently updated — this approach helps reduce 
compute costs
ENZYME COMPUTE ENGINE
Instead of recomputing entire tables or views from scratch every time new data 
arrives or changes occur, Enzyme intelligently determines and processes only the 
new or changed data. This approach dramatically reduces resource consumption 
and latency compared to traditional batch ETL methods.
74
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The diagram below outlines how the Enzyme engine intelligently determines the 
optimal way to update a materialized view.
The Enzyme engine selects the update strategy and determines whether 
to perform an incremental or full refresh based on its internal cost model, 
optimizing for performance and compute efficiency.
ENABLE DELTA TABLE FEATURES
Enabling row tracking on source tables is required to incrementalize  
the MV recompute.
Row tracking helps detect which rows have changed since the last MV refresh. It 
enables Databricks to track row-level lineage in a Delta table and is required for 
specific incremental updates to materialized views.
Enabling deletion vectors is an optional feature. Deletion vectors allow 
Databricks to track which rows have been deleted from the source table. This 
prevents the need to rewrite full files and avoids rewriting entire files when only  
a few rows are deleted.
To enable these table features on the source table, leverage the following  
SQL code:
Technical solution breakdown
This next section will walk through an example of how to detect when a pipeline 
triggers a full recompute vs. an incremental refresh on an MV and how to 
encourage an incremental refresh.
This technical walkthrough follows these high-level steps:
1. Generate a Delta table with randomly generated data
2. Create and use an SDP to create a materialized view
3. Add a non-deterministic function to the materialized view
4. Rerun the pipeline and observe the impact on the refresh behavior
5. Update the pipeline to restore incremental refresh
6. Query the pipeline event log to inspect the refresh technique
To follow along with this example, please clone this script: MV_Incremental_
Technical_Breakdown.ipynb
SQL
ALTER TABLE my_table SET TBLPROPERTIES (
  'delta.enableRowTracking' = 'true',
  'delta.enableDeletionVectors' = 'true'
);
75
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Within the run_mv_refresh_demo() function, the first step generates a Delta 
table with randomly generated data:
Then, the Databricks SDK is used to create and deploy the SDP.
MVs can be created through either a serverless SDP or Databricks SQL (DBSQL) 
and behave the same. DBSQL MVs launch a managed serverless SDP that is 
coupled to the MV under the hood. This example leverages a serverless SDP to 
utilize various features, such as publishing the event log, but it would behave the 
same if a DBSQL MV were used.
Once the pipeline is successfully created, the function will then run an update on 
the pipeline:
Next, the following function is run to insert randomly generated data.  
This is run before each new pipeline run to ensure that new records are  
available for aggregation.
SQL
CREATE CATALOG IF NOT EXISTS {catalog_name};
CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS {catalog_name}.demo;
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE random_data ( 
id STRING,
name STRING) 
USING DELTA
TBLPROPERTIES (
'delta.autoOptimize.optimizeWrite' = 'true',
'delta.autoOptimize.autoCompact' = 'true',
'delta.enableRowTracking' = 'true',
'delta.enableDeletionVectors' = 'true',
'delta.feature.allowColumnDefaults' = 'supported');
PYTHON
pipeline = w.pipelines.create(
    catalog={catalog_name},
    continuous=False,
    channel="PREVIEW",
    name=f"{catalog_name}_mv_demo_pipeline",
    schema="demo",
    libraries=[
        PipelineLibrary(glob=PathPattern(include=mv_path))
    ],
    serverless=True,
    event_log=EventLogSpec(
catalog=catalog_name, 
schema=schema,
name="event_log_incremental_refresh_demo"))
PYTHON
w.pipelines.start_update(pipeline.pipeline_id)
SQL
-- Insert new records into tables
INSERT INTO {catalog_name}.demo.random_data
SELECT 
  CAST(rand() * 100000 AS BIGINT) AS id,
  CASE CAST(rand() * 5 AS INT)
    WHEN 0 THEN 'Alice'
    WHEN 1 THEN 'Bob'
    WHEN 2 THEN 'Charlie'
    WHEN 3 THEN 'Diana'
    ELSE 'Eve'
  END AS name
FROM RANGE(5);
76
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
After the pipeline has successfully run and created the initial materialized view, 
the next step is to add more data and refresh the view. After running the pipeline, 
check the event log to review the refresh behavior.
The results show that the materialized view was incrementally refreshed, 
indicated by the GROUP_AGGREGATE message.
Next, to demonstrate how adding a non-deterministic function like RANDOM() 
can prevent the materialized view from incrementally refreshing, the MV is 
updated to the following:
To account for changes in the MV and to demonstrate the non-deterministic 
function, the pipeline is executed twice and data is added. The event log is then 
queried again, and the results show a full recompute.
SQL
SELECT timestamp, message    
FROM {catalog_name}.demo.event_log_incremental_refresh_demo 
WHERE event_type = 'planning_information'
ORDER BY timestamp DESC;
SQL
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW random_data_MV
SELECT
    name,
    RANDOM() AS random_number, -- added!
    COUNT(id) as name_count
FROM {catalog_name}.demo.random_data
GROUP BY name;
Run # Message Flow type
2 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to 
be executed as GROUP_AGGREGATE.
No non-deterministic 
function. Incrementally 
refreshed.
1 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
Initial Run. Full 
recompute.
Run # Message Explanation
4 Flow 'andrea_tardif.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
MV includes non-
deterministic — full 
recompute triggered.
3 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
MV definition changed 
— full recompute 
triggered.
2 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to 
be executed as GROUP_AGGREGATE.
Incremental refresh — 
no non-deterministic 
functions present.
1 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
Initial run — full 
recompute required.
77
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
By adding non-deterministic functions, such as RANDOM() or CURRENT_DATE(), 
the MV cannot incrementally refresh because the output cannot be predicted 
based solely on changes in the source data.
Within the pipeline event log details, under planning_information, the JSON event 
details provide the following reason for preventing incrementalization:
Once new data is added and the pipeline is run again, query the event log. The 
output shows that the MV performed a GROUP_AGGREGATE rather than a 
COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
If having a non-deterministic function is necessary for your analysis, a better 
approach is to push that value into the source table itself rather than calculating 
it dynamically in the materialized view. We will accomplish this by moving the 
random_number column to pull from the source table instead of adding it in at 
the MV level.
Below is the updated materialized view query to reference the static random_
number column within the MV:
JSON
{
"issue_type": "PLAN_NOT_DETERMINISTIC",
"prevent_incrementalization": true,
"expression_name": "Rand",
"plan_not_deterministic_sub_type": "NON_DETERMINISTIC_EXPRESSION"
}
SQL
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW random_data_MV
SELECT
    name,
    random_number, -- updated to pull from source table!
    COUNT(id) as name_count
FROM {catalog_name}.demo.random_data
GROUP BY name, random_number;
Run # Message Explanation
5 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to 
be executed as GROUP_AGGREGATE.
MV uses deterministic 
logic — incremental 
refresh.
4 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
MV includes non-
deterministic — full 
recompute triggered.
3 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
MV definition changed 
— full recompute 
triggered.
2 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to 
be executed as GROUP_AGGREGATE.
Incremental refresh — 
no non-deterministic 
functions present.
1 Flow '<catalog_name>.demo.random_
data_mv' has been planned in DLT to be 
executed as COMPLETE_RECOMPUTE.
Initial run — full 
recompute required.
78
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
A full refresh can be automatically triggered by the pipeline under  
the following conditions:
 ■ Use of non-deterministic functions like UUID() and RANDOM()
 ■ Creating materialized views that involve complex joins, such as cross, full 
outer, semi, anti and large numbers of joins
 ■ Enzyme determines that it is less computationally expensive to perform 
a full recompute
Learn more about incremental refresh compatible functions here.
Real-world data volume
In most cases, the data ingestion is much larger than inserting five rows. To 
illustrate this, let's insert 1 billion rows into the initial load and then 10 million into 
each pipeline run.
Using dbldatagen to randomly generate data and the Databricks SDK to create 
and run an SDP, 1 billion rows were inserted into the source table, and the pipeline 
was run to generate the MV. Then, 10 million rows were added to the source 
data, and the MV was incrementally refreshed. Afterward, the pipeline was force 
refreshed to perform a full recompute.
Once the pipeline completes, use the list_pipeline_events and the billing system 
table, merged on dlt_update_id, to determine the cost per update.
As shown in the graph below, the incremental refresh was twice as fast and 
cheaper than the full refresh.
Operational considerations
Strong monitoring, observability and automation practices are crucial for fully 
realizing the benefits of incremental refreshes in declarative pipelines. The 
following section outlines how to leverage Databricks monitoring capabilities to 
track pipeline refreshes and cost.
79
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
MONITORING PIPELINE REFRESHES
Tools like the event log and the SDP UI provide visibility into pipeline execution 
patterns, helping detect when various refreshes occur.
We've included an accelerator tool to help teams track and analyze materialized 
view refresh behavior. This solution leverages AI/BI dashboards to provide 
visibility into refresh patterns. It uses the Databricks SDK to retrieve all pipelines 
in your configured workspace, gather event details for the pipelines and then 
produce a dashboard similar to the one below.
Key takeaways
Incrementalizing the material view refreshes allows Databricks to process  
only new or changed data in the source tables, improving performance and 
reducing costs.
With MVs, avoid using non-deterministic functions (i.e., CURRENT_DATE() and 
RANDOM()) and limit query complexity (i.e., excessive joins) to enable efficient 
incremental refreshes. Ignoring unexpected full recomputes on MVs that could 
be refactored to be incremental recomputes could lead to:
 ■ Increased compute costs
 ■ Slower data freshness for downstream applications
 ■ Pipeline bottlenecks as data volumes scale
With serverless compute, SDPs leverage the built-in execution model, allowing 
Enzyme to perform an incremental or full recompute based on the overall 
pipeline computation cost.
Leverage the accelerator tool to monitor the behavior of all your pipelines in an 
AI/BI dashboard to detect unexpected full recomputes.
In conclusion, to create efficient materialized view refreshes, follow these  
best practices:
 ■ Use deterministic logic where applicable
 ■ Refactor queries to avoid non-deterministic functions
 ■ Simplify join logic
 ■ Enable row tracking on the source tables
Github link: monitoring-declarative-pipeline-refresh-behavior
80
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Next steps and additional resources
Review your MV refresh types today
Databricks DSAs accelerate data and AI initiatives across organizations. They 
provide architectural leadership, optimize platforms for cost and performance, 
enhance developer experience and drive successful project execution. DSAs 
bridge the gap between initial deployment and production-grade solutions — 
working closely with various teams, including data engineering, technical leads, 
executives and other stakeholders to ensure tailored solutions and faster time to 
value. To benefit from a custom execution plan, strategic guidance and support 
throughout your data and AI journey from a DSA, please contact your Databricks 
Account Team.
Additional resources
 ■ Load and process data incrementally with Spark Declarative Pipelines 
flows | Databricks Documentation
 ■ Incremental refresh for materialized views | Databricks Documentation
Create an SDP and review MV incremental refresh types today.
81
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Reverse ETL With Lakebase: Activate Your 
Lakehouse Data for Operational Analytics
Serve data from the lakehouse to applications reliably and at 
scale, without custom pipelines
By Firas Farah and Yatish Anand
Introduction: Analytics and operations  
are converging 
Applications today can’t rely on raw events alone. They need curated, contextual 
and actionable data from the lakehouse to power personalization, automation 
and intelligent user experiences. 
Delivering that data reliably with low latency has been a challenge, often requiring 
complex pipelines and custom infrastructure.
Lakebase addresses this problem. It pairs a high-performance Postgres database 
with native lakehouse integration, making reverse ETL simple and reliable.
What is reverse ETL? 
Reverse ETL syncs high-quality data from a lakehouse into the operational 
systems that power applications. This ensures that trusted datasets and AI-
driven insights flow directly into applications that power personalization, 
recommendations, fraud detection and real-time decisioning.
Without reverse ETL, insights remain in the lakehouse and don’t reach the 
applications that require them. The lakehouse is where data gets cleaned, 
enriched and turned into analytics, but it isn’t built for low-latency app 
interactions or transactional workloads. That’s where Lakebase comes in, 
delivering trusted lakehouse data directly into the tools where it drives action, 
without custom pipelines.
In practice, reverse ETL typically involves four key components, all integrated  
into Lakebase:
 ■ Lakehouse: Stores curated, high-quality data used to drive decisions, 
such as business-level aggregate tables (aka “Gold tables”), engineered 
features and ML inference outputs
 ■ Syncing pipelines: Move relevant data into operational stores with 
scheduling, freshness guarantees and monitoring
 ■ Operational database: Optimized for high concurrency, low latency and 
ACID transactions
 ■ Applications: The final destination where insights become action, whether 
in customer-facing applications, internal tools, APIs or dashboards
82
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
CHALLENGES OF REVERSE ETL TODAY
Reverse ETL looks simple, but in practice, most teams face the same challenges:
 ■ Brittle, custom-built ETL pipelines: These pipelines often require 
streaming infrastructure, schema management, error handling and 
orchestration. They’re brittle and resource-intensive to maintain.
 ■ Multiple, disconnected systems: Separate stacks for analytics and 
operations mean more infrastructure to manage, more authentication 
layers and more chances for format mismatches
 ■ Inconsistent governance models: Analytical and operational systems 
usually live in different policy domains, making it difficult to apply 
consistent quality controls and audit policies
These challenges create friction for both developers and the business, slowing 
down efforts to reliably activate data and deliver intelligent,  
real-time applications.
Lakebase: Integrated by default for easy  
reverse ETL 
Lakebase removes these barriers and transforms reverse ETL into a fully 
managed, integrated workflow. It combines a high-performance Postgres engine, 
deep lakehouse integration and built-in data synchronization so that fresh 
insights flow into applications without extra infrastructure.
These capabilities of Lakebase are especially valuable for reverse ETL:
 ■ Deep lakehouse integration: Sync data from lakehouse tables to 
Lakebase on a snapshot, scheduled, or continuous basis, without building 
or managing external ETL jobs. This replaces the complexity of custom 
pipelines, retries and monitoring with a native, managed experience.
 ■ Fully managed Postgres: Built on open source Postgres, Lakebase 
supports ACID transactions, indexes, joins and extensions such as PostGIS 
and pgvector. You can connect with existing drivers and tools like pgAdmin 
or JDBC, avoiding the need to learn new database technologies or 
maintain separate OLTP infrastructure.
 ■ Scalable, resilient architecture: Lakebase separates compute and 
storage for independent scaling, delivering sub-10 ms query latency 
and thousands of QPS. Enterprise-grade features include multi-AZ high 
availability, point-in-time recovery and encrypted storage. This removes 
the scaling and resiliency challenges of self-managed databases.
 ■ Integrated security and governance: Register Lakebase with Unity 
Catalog to bring operational data into your centralized governance 
framework, covering audit trails and permissions at the catalog level. 
Access via Postgres protocol still uses native Postgres roles and 
permissions, ensuring authentic transactional security while fitting into 
your broader Databricks governance model.
 ■ Cloud-agnostic architecture: Deploy Lakebase alongside your  
lakehouse in your preferred cloud environment without re-architecting 
your workflows
83
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
With these capabilities in the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform, Lakebase 
replaces the fragmented reverse ETL setup that relies on custom pipelines, 
standalone OLTP systems and separate governance. It delivers an integrated, 
high-performance and secure service, ensuring that analytical insights flow  
into applications more quickly — with less operational effort and with  
governance preserved.
Sample use case: Building an intelligent support 
portal with Lakebase
As a practical example, let’s walk through how to build an intelligent support 
portal powered by Lakebase. This interactive portal helps support teams 
triage incoming incidents using ML -driven insights from the lakehouse, such as 
predicted escalation risk and recommended actions, while allowing users to 
assign ownership, track status and leave comments on each ticket.
Lakebase makes this possible by syncing predictions into Postgres while also 
storing updates from the app. The result is a support portal that combines 
analytics with live operations. The same approach applies to many other use 
cases, including personalization engines and ML -driven dashboards.
Step 1: Sync predictions from the Lakehouse  
to Lakebase
The incident data, enriched with ML predictions, lives in a Delta table and  
is updated in near real time via a streaming pipeline. To power the support  
app, we use Lakebase reverse ETL to continuously sync this Delta table to  
a Postgres table.
In the UI, we select:
 ■ Sync mode: Continuous for low-latency updates
 ■ Primary key: incident_id
This ensures the app reflects the latest data with minimal delay.
Note: You can also create the sync pipeline programmatically using the 
Databricks SDK.
84
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Step 2: Create a state table for user inputs
The support app also needs a table to store user-entered data like ownership, 
status and comments. Since this data is written from the app, it should go into a 
separate table in Lakebase (rather than the synced table).
Here’s the schema:
This design ensures that reverse ETL stays unidirectional (Lakehouse → 
Lakebase), while still allowing interactive updates via the app.
Step 3: Configure Lakebase access  
in Databricks Apps
Databricks Apps support first-class integration with Lakebase. When creating 
your app, simply add Lakebase as an app resource and select the Lakebase 
instance and database. Databricks automatically provisions a corresponding 
Postgres role for the app’s service principal, streamlining app-to-database 
connectivity. You can then grant this role the required database, schema and 
table permissions.
Step 4: Deploy your app code
With your data synced and permissions in place, you can now deploy the Flask 
app that powers the support portal. The app connects to Lakebase via Postgres 
and serves a rich dashboard with charts, filters and interactivity.
Conclusion
Bringing analytical insights into operational applications no longer needs to  
be a complex, brittle process. With Lakebase, reverse ETL becomes a fully 
managed and integrated capability. It combines the performance of a Postgres 
engine, the reliability of a scalable architecture and the governance of the 
Databricks Platform. 
Whether you are powering an intelligent support portal or building other real-
time, data-driven experiences, Lakebase reduces engineering overhead and 
speeds up the path from insight to action.
To learn more about how to create synced tables in Lakebase, check out our 
documentation and get started today.
SQL
CREATE TABLE support.user_updates (
  incident_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY, owner TEXT, comment TEXT, status 
TEXT
)
85
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Production-Grade Data Quality Using 
Spark Declarative Pipelines
By Matt Holzapfel
Good data quality isn't just a nice-to-have — it's a necessity, especially in 
regulated industries like financial services. Companies in the industry are 
investing in AI to automate processes and decision-making, creating increasingly 
sophisticated data ecosystems that demand rigorous quality control.
The success of these AI initiatives relies on high-quality data. End users know 
poor data quality when they see it, but to be successful with data and AI, teams 
must go beyond anecdotes and have quantitative measurements. As the adage 
goes, “You can’t manage what you don’t measure.”
The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform provides a unified solution for data 
and AI with robust data engineering capabilities for building and monitoring data 
pipelines. Spark Declarative Pipelines lets users create batch and streaming 
data pipelines in SQL and Python. This includes giving users the ability to apply 
quality constraints, known as ‘expectations’, to capture data quality metrics and 
automatically take action when issues are found.
Measuring what matters requires having an effective data quality framework in 
mind before starting to implement expectations. We’ll share some of the best 
practices we’ve seen so that you can feel confident in the quality of the data 
feeding your downstream applications and consumers. 
Upstream data drift equals downstream chaos
Anyone who has worked with data pipelines knows the challenge. Upstream data 
changes unexpectedly, and downstream teams discover the issue only after it 
causes problems. The upstream changes might be subtle — new attributes being 
collected, new values being allowed in existing fields, or schema changes — but 
the impact on business processes or data consumers’ trust can be significant. 
Possibly the worst part is that data pipelines often continue to execute normally 
despite their polluted nature. ETL jobs complete successfully, dashboards 
update on schedule and everything looks green. 
Best case: A data consumer with a strong intuition of the data catches the error, 
and it’s addressed before it can impact the customer experience.
Worst case: The issue lingers for weeks and requires a multi-team investigation 
to identify and resolve the root cause. Adding insult to injury, when issues like 
this happen in highly regulated industries like financial services, they often 
require detailed root cause analyses to be completed and can trigger  
regulatory reviews. 
86
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Applying a data quality framework to protect your 
pipelines from the unexpected
It’s not always painfully obvious when poor-quality data has infiltrated  
a pipeline. A good data quality framework recognizes this and should be 
designed such that:
 ■ Alarm bells go off when there is clearly an issue: When something 
is clearly wrong, such as a new client being onboarded without any 
identifiers, action should be taken automatically to isolate the bad data
 ■ Potential issues are flagged so workflows can be built around them: 
Data that is an outlier when compared to historic values, such as a client 
being onboarded with a net worth of $10bn, could mean there is an issue, 
but it’s not always cut and dry without more context. In these cases, it 
can be smarter to flag the value for human review rather than disrupting a 
business process.
Expectations provide the tooling necessary to apply this nuance (and more) to 
pipeline monitoring so that issues are handled appropriately. Using standard 
SQL Boolean statements, expectations apply data quality checks on each record 
passing through a query. 
Databricks couples this with tooling to monitor and understand data quality 
issues across your entire pipeline. The first piece of this tooling is a set of 
pipeline metrics, available within the Lakeflow UI, that show the number of 
expectations applied to each table or view and passed/failed records.
Each SDP pipeline saves events and expectations metrics in the storage  
location defined on the pipeline. The event log table shows the name of each 
expectation and the number of issues it identified, enabling us to get granular 
information about changes to data quality over time. Refer to Databricks 
documentation for additional details about how to access this table and  
the full list of attributes available. 
87
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
We can make this information even more broadly available and further simplify 
and centralize data quality monitoring by creating an AI/BI dashboard using these 
event logs.
Invalid data
When new data is seen in a pipeline that doesn’t follow a common format or 
structure (e.g., custom country codes), it’s often an early indicator of upstream 
issues that need to be addressed. Diagnosing the root cause can be time-
consuming, so as a first order of business, this data shouldn’t be allowed  
to flow downstream. As a simple example, if we acquire lists of prospective 
clients for an email marketing campaign, we should drop any record without  
a valid email address.
But in order to get these insights about our pipelines, we first need to set up 
expectations within SDP. Let’s look at some specific examples across a variety of 
data quality issues:
SQL
CREATE STREAMING TABLE email_prospects (
 CONSTRAINT `Emails must contain @` EXPECT (email_address LIKE 
'%@%') ON VIOLATION DROP ROW
)
 COMMENT "Livestream of new prospects for email campaign"
AS SELECT * from STREAM(live.new_prospects)
88
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Incomplete data
Invalid data by another name, incomplete data is particularly common when 
upstream systems or transformations have built-in truncation logic. Continuing 
with our email marketing example, we might find that a value has an “@” but 
stops there. One of the great things about the expectations feature is that we 
can simply add this constraint to our previous query. 
Missing data
The difference between missing and nonexistent data can be difficult to 
decipher without business context. Consulting with downstream consumers 
is a good idea when implementing most data quality rules, especially when 
monitoring for missing data. A marketer putting together a personalized 
campaign will likely say that they can’t do anything with prospect data that 
doesn’t contain any contact information. We can use expectations to remove this 
data and only provide actionable contacts.
Keep in mind, when you define a Databricks SQL materialized view directly over a 
streaming live table that has an EXPECT constraint, the system can’t use change 
data feed to compute “what’s new” vs. “what’s already been processed.” As a 
result, every REFRESH will re-scan and re-process the entire source, not just the 
newest data. Alternatively, you can avoid this by applying your EXPECT checks 
upstream and writing the validated data into a static Delta table.
SQL
CREATE STREAMING TABLE email_prospects (
 CONSTRAINT `Emails must contain @` EXPECT (email_address LIKE 
'%@%') ON VIOLATION DROP ROW,
 CONSTRAINT `Emails cannot end with @`   EXPECT (SUBSTR(email_
address, -1) != '@') ON VIOLATION DROP ROW
)
 COMMENT "Livestream of new prospects for email campaign"
AS SELECT * REPLACE(rtrim(email_address) AS email_address) from 
STREAM(live.new_prospects)
SQL
CREATE OR REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW marketing_prospects (
 CONSTRAINT `Records must contain at least 1 piece of contact 
information` EXPECT (email_address IS NOT NULL or full_address IS 
NOT NULL or phone_number IS NOT NULL) ON VIOLATION DROP ROW
)
 COMMENT "Marketing prospects for personalized marketing campaign"
AS SELECT * from STREAM(live.marketing_prospects)
89
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Inconsistent data
Data consumers are often great at spotting data quality issues because they 
have an intuition for the range of acceptable values through a mix of business 
and historical context. Luckily, we can codify some of this context by comparing 
values to historical statistical ranges and flagging those that fall outside a range. 
For example, if we capture the net worth of new clients during onboarding, we 
can set an expectation to flag when we see an outlier value, which could signal 
that net worth was provided in the wrong currency. 
Stale data
If we’ve designed our pipeline to only ingest new, incremental values, then 
we typically don’t expect to see values created that are months or years old. 
However, that’s not always the case. Transactions can be restated, data from 
legacy systems can be added and one-off files can be added to enrich  
existing data. Data that seems stale on the surface can actually be legitimate  
and valuable. That shouldn’t stop us from monitoring when this happens so 
that we can verify that there isn’t actually an issue, such as old data being 
inadvertently replicated.
SQL
CREATE OR REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW net_worth_validation AS
 WITH bounds AS (
   SELECT
   0 as lower_bound,
   avg(net_worth) + 4 * stddev(net_worth) as upper_bound
   FROM historical_stats
   WHERE date >= CURRENT_DATE() - INTERVAL 180 DAYS
 )
 SELECT
   new_clients.*,
   bounds.*
 FROM new_clients
 CROSS JOIN bounds;
SQL
CREATE OR REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW validated_net_worth (
 CONSTRAINT 'Net worth must fall within historic range' EXPECT 
(amount BETWEEN lower_bound AND upper_bound)
)
AS SELECT * FROM net_worth_validation;
SQL
CREATE STREAMING TABLE client_transactions (
 CONSTRAINT `Warn if transaction is more than 90 days old` EXPECT 
(timestamp >= CURRENT_DATE() - INTERVAL 90 DAYS
)
 COMMENT "Cleared and validated client transactions"
AS SELECT * from STREAM(live.client_transactions)
90
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Inaccurate data
Perhaps the most challenging data quality issue of all is that inaccurate data 
can be created for reasons unrelated to any broader issues. A customer service 
agent may mishear a client on the phone and enter the wrong phone number, a 
client can enter a typo on a web portal or a client can change their address and 
forget to notify the bank. 
Unfortunately, there’s no ‘silver bullet’ for these types of issues. Instead, we 
must listen for issues happening downstream and continuously evolve our 
expectations. We can do this by creating a Delta Table that contains a set of 
rules used to tag suspect values. The benefit is that these rules can be applied 
retroactively and across many datasets, allowing us to review the entire corpus 
as we discover new ways to identify inaccurate data. For example, if we learn that 
customer support agents have been trained to use a value like “9999999999” 
when a client isn’t willing to provide their income, we can add this to a set of 
validation rules. 
The example below shows what it might look like for a new client questionnaire. 
First, we define the rules.
SQL
  return {
      row['name']: row['constraint']
      for row in df
  }
@dlt.table
@dlt.expect_all_or_drop(get_rules('validity'))
def raw_client_questionnaire():
  return (
    spark.read.format('csv').option("header", "true")
      .load('/client_questionnaire_responses/')
  )raint,
  col3 AS tag
FROM (
  VALUES
  ("age_range_valid","age BETWEEN 18 AND 120","validity"),
  ("income_range_valid","annual_income >= 0 AND annual_income < 
10000000","validity"),
  ("email_format_valid","RLIKE(email, '^[a-zA-Z0-9._%+-]+@
[a-zA-Z0-9.-]+\.[a-zA-Z]{2,6}$')","validity")
)
SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE TABLE
  data_accuracy_rules
AS SELECT
  col1 AS name,
  col2 AS constspark.read.table("data_accuracy_rules").
filter(col("tag") == tag).collect()
91
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Now, we can apply those rules to our questionnaire responses and drop any 
records that violate them.
Since inaccurate data can be so hard to identify through rules alone, there  
are cases where it may be more appropriate to quarantine records for  
a data steward to review instead of dropping them entirely. Sticking with  
our client onboarding example, let’s say we want to automatically quarantine 
records where a welcome email to the client can’t be delivered. To do this, 
we can create separate processing paths for valid and invalid records in 
downstream operations.
PYTHON
import dlt
from pyspark.sql.functions import expr, col
def get_rules(tag):
  df = spark.read.table("data_accuracy_rules").filter(col("tag") == 
tag).collect()
  return {
      row['name']: row['constraint']
      for row in df
  }
@Dlt.table
@Dlt.expect_all_or_drop(get_rules('validity'))
def raw_client_questionnaire():
  return (
    spark.read.format('csv').option("header", "true")
      .load('/client_questionnaire_responses/')
  )
SQL
CREATE STREAMING VIEW raw_new_clients AS
  SELECT * FROM STREAM(prod.clients.profile);
CREATE OR REFRESH STREAMING TABLE clients_profile_quarantine(
  CONSTRAINT quarantined_row EXPECT (welcome_email_delivery != 
'false')
)
PARTITIONED BY (is_quarantined)
AS
  SELECT
    *,
    NOT (welcome_email_delivery != 'false') as is_quarantined
  FROM STREAM(raw_new_clients);
CREATE OR REFRESH STREAMING TABLE valid_client_profiles AS
SELECT * FROM clients_profile_quarantine WHERE is_quarantined=FALSE;
CREATE OR REFRESH STREAMING TABLE invalid_client_profiles AS
SELECT * FROM clients_profile_quarantine WHERE is_quarantined=TRUE;
92
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Great data quality is a process, not a destination
It’s impossible to solve all data quality issues in one shot, but realizing and 
maintaining high-quality data doesn’t need to be overwhelming. 
By implementing a comprehensive data quality framework using expectations  
in Databricks, you can:
 ■ Establish a scorecard to measure progress over time
 ■ Avoid getting caught off guard by data quality issues
 ■ Identify and address upstream problems that affect  
downstream processes
 ■ Gradually decrease the frequency and severity of data quality issues
With trust in your data, you'll be able to confidently deliver on data and AI 
initiatives that drive real business value. By making data quality management 
a core discipline of your data engineering practice, you can ensure that the 
benefits are long-lasting.
93
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Collaborative Data Engineering Made 
Simple With Databricks Asset Bundles
By Daniel Taylor and Axel Richier
Data engineering has historically suffered from the inheritance of software 
engineering best practices. As it emerged in the early 2010s out of the shadow of 
new data-intensive systems, the industry has always sought to apply the same 
practices uniformly to a vastly different type of engineering.
Whether that be unit and integration testing, source control, build and release 
processes and orchestrating through CI/CD (continuous integration and 
continuous delivery). In the data world, building a lot of these frameworks from 
scratch can be cumbersome, time-consuming and fragile. Regardless, those 
best practices exist for a reason and should not be ignored. Instead, they should 
be improved upon and adapted to suit the workload at hand. This empowers 
engineers to view these frameworks as necessities in production rather than 
blockers or nice-to-haves.
Databricks Intelligence Platform: DevX tooling  
at your fingertips
One of the key strengths of the Databricks Intelligence Platform is the vast 
amount of DevX tooling at your disposal, helping engineers to get into production 
and to adhere to these industry-standard best practices. Today, you can use a 
combination of Terraform for static, core infrastructure assets (more on this later) 
and Databricks Asset Bundles for application code, data projects and ephemeral 
resources such as job compute for your application code.
What are Databricks Asset Bundles?
According to the docs, “Databricks Asset Bundles are a tool to facilitate the 
adoption of software engineering best practices, including source control,  
code review, testing and continuous integration and delivery, for your data  
and AI projects.”
But what does that actually mean in practice? And what tangible, real-world 
examples can we demonstrate so that we can realize these benefits?
DABs is a tool that comes pre-packaged as part of the Databricks CLI, providing 
a framework where engineering teams can structure source control repositories 
so that their application code lives alongside orchestration pipelines. This 
includes Lakeflow Jobs, Spark Declarative Pipelines, Databricks Apps, training 
and inference of ML models, etc. These pipelines are defined declaratively using 
YAML (or JSON, and more recently, Python) syntax and can adhere to any type of 
configuration your data project requires.
94
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Behind the scenes, Asset Bundles acts as a Databricks-supported wrapper 
around the Databricks Terraform provider for all resources relating to application 
code. This lowers the barrier to entry for engineers unfamiliar with Terraform’s 
concepts and syntax, while offering additional flexibility and tooling that caters 
specifically to that data development lifecycle we’ve mentioned above. Engineers 
who are familiar with Terraform will acknowledge its lack of fluidity and ability to 
quickly iterate when it comes to things like unit and integration testing as well 
as state management — especially across different, simultaneous development 
tasks on the same subset of resources.
If you want to understand the core concepts behind Databricks Asset Bundles 
in much more detail, including the root mapping configuration, resource-specific 
mappings and CLI commands, we recommend starting with the documentation. 
We won’t be exploring these concepts too deeply in this chapter.
Breaking the Terraform collaboration bottleneck
The true power of DABs becomes clear when we examine how it enables multiple 
developers working on the same (or different, but within the same repository) 
data projects simultaneously.
In lower, noncontrolled environments, and if we were to use Terraform as the 
DevX tool of choice, each individual’s deployment would overwrite existing 
configurations (assuming a single, remote state file was used). This is extremely 
problematic, not only if individuals are working on the same resource, but also on 
different resources.
When using Terraform as a DevX tool, you can start to see how collaboration is 
bottlenecked. As great a tool as it is, it wasn’t really designed for this.
DABs solves this issue by applying isolation to an individual’s state file in lower 
environments, all while abstracting state file management and maintenance away 
from the user. What does this actually mean in practice? 
 ■ If engineer Alice deployed her modified code repository on her own 
version-controlled feature branch using Asset Bundles to a development 
environment, Asset Bundles would isolate all of her data projects to her 
state file stored in the workspace file system under her user.
 ■ If engineer Bob then also happened to simultaneously deploy his own 
modified code repository from his feature branch using Asset Bundles 
to the same development environment, Alice’s changes and the data 
projects in her branch would remain completely unaffected in the 
workspace because of the same isolation mechanism.
95
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
How does Asset Bundles achieve this behavior?
Asset Bundles have a concept of a top-level configuration; in essence, this is just 
a YAML file in a project’s root (named `databricks.yaml`) that is used to define all 
of your deployment targets as well as reusable complex and static variables.
The key mapping that we need to consider in our bundles’ root configuration 
in this scenario is `mode`. `mode` can take one of two possible default values, 
`development` or `production`. For lower environments, we want to specify our 
targets’ deployment mode to `development`. In turn, this will deploy all resources 
under our bundle and isolate all those resources to the user issuing the 
deployment from their local machine. Databricks Asset Bundles will also  
prefix each resource that has been deployed with a unique prefix, so each 
job, Spark Declarative Pipeline, ML model, etc., will not be overwritten by 
simultaneous deployments.
Note — the `production` deployment mode should be used with a service 
principal for all other environments, such as UAT and production. If 
`development` or `production` doesn’t fit your needs, it is now possible to set up 
custom modes.
See it in action: A real-world example
Let’s explore seamless collaboration and independent development work 
with Asset Bundles. As a prerequisite, ensure that you have the Databricks 
CLI installed and configured for your development environment. For this 
walkthrough, we’re using CLI version 0.277.0.
If you want to follow along, the source code that we’ll be utilizing below can be 
found here.
We’re going to imagine the scenario described above: Engineer Alice has been 
assigned a task that involves a change to a specific Spark Declarative Pipeline 
based on some upstream changes. In the same stand-up from earlier in the 
week, engineer Bob has been assigned a similar but distinct task that involves 
changing a different declarative pipeline based on some downstream reporting 
changes. Both pipelines are defined in a version-controlled mono-repository.
Both engineers pull the remote changes from the remote repository into their 
local version and branch off onto their unique feature branches.
Each engineer then makes local changes to their respective Spark Declarative 
Pipelines and is now ready to deploy to a lower environment so that they can 
perform integration tests.
git pull origin staging
git checkout -b feature/alice # or feature/bob
96
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Engineers Alice and Bob both deploy all defined jobs from their respective 
feature branches to the same lower environment and at the same time.
We can now see distinct versions of each Spark Declarative Pipeline in our 
development workspace, specific to the copy in each of our engineers’ feature 
branches. Without Asset Bundles, working on the same assets would lead to risks 
of overwrite and the impossibility of running developments separately.databricks bundle validate -t dev --profile <your_profile>
databricks bundle deploy -t dev --profile <your_profile>
97
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
The road to production
Once each developer has tested their isolated changes in their respective 
branches (e.g., `dev/alice` and `dev/bob`), they can prepare to merge their 
updates into the main branch. Each developer would create a pull request from 
their feature branch to the main branch. The PR serves as a proposal to merge 
their changes, allowing for code reviews and discussions. 
Once the PR is approved, the changes from each developer's branch are merged 
into the main branch, integrating their distinct updates into the shared workflow.
Accelerating time-to-production
This is how Databricks Asset Bundles removes development friction for data 
engineering teams, enabling iterative deployment while maintaining software 
engineering best practices. The result is a dramatically faster time-to-production 
cycle for data products.
By solving the collaboration challenges that typically plague data engineering 
teams, Databricks Asset Bundles allows you to focus on what matters — 
delivering valuable data pipelines and insights. Instead of fighting with 
infrastructure and deployment conflicts, you can prioritize delivering  
business value.databricks bundle deploy -t prod --profile <your_profile>
98
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
A Practical Guide to Serverless Migrations
By Diego Gomez
Many customers have been eager to adopt serverless compute on Databricks, 
attracted by the promise of eliminating infrastructure management, gaining 
elastic scalability and simplifying the user experience for their teams. Unlocking 
the full value of serverless involves rethinking environment configuration, cost 
governance and dependency management to ensure a smooth transition. 
In this chapter, we’ll walk through a practical playbook for serverless migrations 
so you can approach them with the right tools and considerations.
Before getting started…
It’s worth taking a moment to understand how serverless compute differs from 
classic compute — because many of the operational and financial changes stem 
from that. 
With classic compute, workloads run on clusters directly provisioned within the 
customer’s own cloud account. This means that the customer is responsible for 
choosing cluster size, runtime version and the specific instance types to spin 
up. As the job runs, Databricks charges DBUs for managing and orchestrating 
the workload, while the cloud provider bills separately for the underlying 
infrastructure being used.
Serverless flips this paradigm. Compute resources run fully within Databricks-
managed cloud accounts. Databricks takes care of provisioning, scaling and 
managing the underlying infrastructure behind the scenes — from the user’s 
perspective, it just works.
This shift introduces a few important differences worth highlighting, especially 
around how compute is billed and governed.
 ■ You only pay for the time your workload is actually running
There's no separate charge for idle clusters or VMs sitting idle between jobs. 
Billing starts when the workload starts processing and stops when it completes. 
Note. Pricing details may vary across features. For a full breakdown of 
pricing rates, refer to the official pricing page.
 ■ No virtual machine costs to manage
With serverless, the $DBU rate includes both the compute resources  
and the operational costs. While it may appear higher than classic compute,  
it's fully inclusive. 
To put it into perspective: 
If a job runs on classic compute for five minutes of processing but requires 
several minutes of startup time and stays up for idle time after completion, 
you’re billed for all of that: startup, processing and idle — both in $DBU  
and VM charges.
With serverless, you’d only be billed for the five minutes of actual processing 
time. Startup happens faster (since Databricks-managed warm capacity pools), 
and you’re not charged for any idle or startup time.
This difference is what enabled many customers to see significant cost 
efficiencies — if the proper controls are in place. This brings us to why cost 
governance is such an important part of a successful serverless adoption.
99
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Laying the groundwork: Cost controls
Before even thinking about moving into serverless, it’s important to understand 
how to govern its costs — so you don’t end up surprised by unexpected charges 
later on. 
One key difference with serverless compute is that once it’s enabled in a 
workspace, it’s immediately available to all users by default. Since serverless 
operates within Databricks-managed cloud accounts, any existing compute 
policies that govern classic compute — such as cluster policies — don’t 
automatically apply to serverless workloads. 
While this flexibility allows teams to get up and running quickly, it also means 
that organizations need to establish clear cost controls upfront to ensure that 
serverless consumption aligns with their financial and operational expectations.
Let's make this more concrete by walking through an example.
In this case, serverless compute is being enabled in a development workspace 
used by three groups: data engineers, data scientists and analysts. Each 
persona has different workload patterns and resource needs: 
 ■ Data engineers primarily run batch pipelines and ETL workloads
 ■ Data scientists have started experimenting with deep learning models 
using newly released GPU serverless instances
 ■ Analysts mostly work with ad hoc queries and dashboards using  
SQL serverless
Without proper guardrails, it would be easy for serverless consumption to scale 
unpredictably — particularly as GPU serverless workloads can generate larger 
costs if left unchecked.
Budgets
The Budgets feature allows administrators to define spending thresholds and 
monitor usage across workspaces. In this case, we can configure two separate 
budgets within the development workspace:
 ■ One budget for data scientists, who will be running GPU serverless 
workloads, with a higher threshold to give them room to experiment. It will 
apply to any policies tagged with identifiers related to the data science 
team — for example, tags containing data-science or ds-team.
 ■ A second, smaller budget for data engineers and analysts , whose 
serverless workloads tend to be more predictable and stable. This budget 
will apply to jobs or compute resources tagged with identifiers like data-
engineer or analytics. 
Budgets give us visibility into spend as it grows and allow us to configure alerts 
when usage approaches defined thresholds. These budgets serve as proactive 
guardrails, helping avoid surprises and giving administrators early signals  
before costs escalate unexpectedly. Budgets can be configured at both 
workspace and account levels, allowing flexibility in how spend is tracked and 
controlled across environments.
100
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Serverless budget policies
With budgets in place, the next step is to enforce budget policies for serverless 
compute to automatically apply cost attribution tags and guard spending across 
different teams.
Serverless budget policies allow administrators to define one or more tag key-
value pairs that get automatically applied to any serverless compute activity 
initiated by users or jobs assigned to the policy. As users launch serverless 
compute, these tags are automatically attached behind the scenes, ensuring 
accurate cost attribution and reliable billing records for all serverless workloads. 
The tags then surface directly in the system billing tables (for example, system.
billing.usage → custom_tags), making it easy to track usage and attribute costs to 
specific teams, personas or business units as needed.
In our development workspace scenario, we’ll create budget policies aligned to 
each persona by applying tags: 
 ■ team=data-science for data scientists
 ■ team=data-engineer for data engineers
 ■ team=analyst for analysts
101
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Monitoring serverless spend
Once the budgets and serverless budget policies are in place, the next step is to 
establish ongoing monitoring. This ensures that administrators have full visibility 
into serverless consumption as usage scales — and allows organizations to react 
quickly if spending starts to drift outside expected patterns.
The system.billing.usage system table provides detailed billing records across 
all compute types, which allows for more advanced usage queries, especially 
when paired with system.billing.list_prices. With this information, teams 
can build custom dashboards, configure alerts and create periodic reporting 
pipelines to track serverless usage in near real-time — providing FinOps teams 
with the level of transparency required to confidently scale serverless adoption.
For example, the following query calculates the total list-price cost for serverless 
compute by workspace over the last 30 days:
By scheduling this query to run as an alert, administrators can receive proactive 
notifications as soon as a workspace approaches or exceeds its assigned budget.
Actually migrating a job into serverless
With cost controls and monitoring in place, we can now start migrating workloads 
into serverless compute. The actual migration process is fairly straightforward, 
but there are a few important considerations to be aware of when switching 
compute, managing dependencies and validating performance. 
Switching compute to serverless 
The first step is updating the job to use serverless compute instead of classic 
clusters. For jobs that are already running in production, this can typically be 
done directly from the job configuration UI or API:
Tip: When testing the migration, it’s often a good idea to create a duplicate of the 
job to avoid any unintended impact on production workloads.
At this point, you’ve officially moved the workload onto serverless — just like that. 
The only catch is that serverless keeps things light by default, so you’ll need to 
make sure your job has all the libraries it needs before hitting run.
SQL
SELECT
   t1.workspace_id,
   SUM(t1.usage_quantity * list_prices.pricing.default) AS list_cost
FROM system.billing.usage t1
INNER JOIN system.billing.list_prices 
   ON t1.cloud = list_prices.cloud 
   AND t1.sku_name = list_prices.sku_name 
   AND t1.usage_start_time >= list_prices.price_start_time 
   AND (t1.usage_end_time <= list_prices.price_end_time OR list_
prices.price_end_time IS NULL)
WHERE
   t1.sku_name LIKE '%SERVERLESS%'
   AND billing_origin_product IN ('JOBS', 'INTERACTIVE')
   AND t1.usage_date >= CURRENT_DATE() - INTERVAL 30 DAYS
GROUP BY
   t1.workspace_id
HAVING
   list_cost > {budget}
102
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Understanding serverless environment versions
One key difference when running on serverless is that you no longer control 
the exact runtime image underneath — Databricks takes care of that for you. 
Serverless environments are versioned, with Databricks periodically rolling out 
updates to maintain compatibility, security and stability.
You can find the full list of available serverless environment versions in the 
serverless release notes. Each version includes a set of pre-installed system 
libraries, drivers and configurations.
When getting started, it’s generally good practice to select the latest available 
serverless environment version to take advantage of the most recent fixes, 
performance improvements and package updates.
Configuring library dependencies
Since serverless keeps the environment minimal by default, it’s important to 
define any additional libraries your workload requires. There are a few different 
ways to manage dependencies depending on your use case:
 ■ Workspace-level default dependencies
You can configure default libraries that apply to all serverless compute in the 
workspace. This works well for common packages used across multiple teams. 
Details on how to set this up can be found in the documentation.
 ■ Job task-level dependencies (recommended for production)
For jobs, you can define dependencies directly at the job task level. This provides 
finer control over which packages are installed for each workload, reduces the 
risk of package conflicts and keeps things more predictable as multiple teams 
share the same workspace.
 ■ Notebook-scoped dependencies (useful for development)
For notebooks running on serverless compute, Databricks provides an 
Environment panel directly inside the notebook UI. This allows you to configure 
dependencies (including uploading Python wheel files), memory settings, budget 
policies and the serverless environment version — all from within the notebook 
itself. Find more here. 
These settings will only apply when the notebook is attached  
to serverless compute.
Run, monitor and compare
With your job now fully serverless-ready, you’re ready to hit run. This is where  
all the cost controls, budget policies and monitoring we set up earlier start  
to pay off. 
We’ve created a dashboard that uses system tables to compare classic jobs 
against serverless. Just grab the job_ids, and you’ll be able to view duration and 
costs per run to better understand how the migration is performing. 
103
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Resource: You can find the code and dashboard in this Git repository.
With these tools in place, you’ll be able to experiment safely, validate  
serverless performance for your workloads and decide which jobs are worth fully 
moving over.
Conclusion
And with that, we hope this guide helps you feel better equipped to tackle 
serverless migrations on your own. You’ve got the controls, the monitoring and 
the migration process in place — now you’re ready to put serverless to work.
104
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
03
Case Studies
THE BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING  
iFood: Transforming Data to Elevate 
Food Deliveries and Experiences
iFood, a leading food delivery platform in Brazil, operates at a staggering scale: 
300,000 drivers, 55 million users and 350,000 restaurant partners. This 
ecosystem generates an immense volume of streaming data daily, spanning 
customer orders, delivery logistics and app interactions. With a wide range of 
products and platforms collecting data across the company, iFood processes 
billions of data records daily for analysis and modeling to support strategic 
business decisions. With ambitions to expand and enhance their offerings, iFood 
needed a more reliable, scalable and efficient data platform to meet the growing 
demand for real-time insights and innovation.
The shift from frequent errors to near-zero issues moving 
to Spark Declarative Pipelines has not only improved 
operational efficiency but also freed up our team to focus 
on strategic initiatives instead of firefighting. We’ve reduced 
data pipeline maintenance efforts by about 70% by 
consolidating all pipelines to Spark Declarative Pipelines.
— Thiago Julião, Data Architecture Specialist, iFood
INDUSTRY Retail and Consumer Goods
CLOUD AWS
67% 70% 30%
Reduction in processing 
and storage costs
Reduction in 
maintenance efforts
Less coding time
CUSTOMER 
STORY
106
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Data silos and complex architecture stifled  
agility and accuracy
Prior to Databricks, iFood grappled with a fragmented data architecture that 
hindered their ability to scale effectively. The company relied on a complex 
infrastructure with multiple systems to manage vast amounts of users’ journey 
data — comprising billions of records from various sources, including the 
company’s order management system, consumer app and driver app. As the 
ecosystem grew and new business models emerged, the volume and variety of 
data grew, too, further complicating data processing. With these datasets spread 
across disparate systems, consolidating and accessing critical information 
quickly and reliably became a considerable challenge.
This fragmentation led to significant operational inefficiencies, as iFood’s teams 
struggled to keep track of scattered event data. With the data spread across 
numerous systems and lacking proper governance, troubleshooting and ensuring 
data accuracy became a time-consuming and error-prone process. iFood’s 
data engineering team faced immense challenges, including the significant 
engineering effort to manually code, optimize and maintain complex workflows 
for data processing. The company’s data engineering team previously spent 
countless hours troubleshooting errors and coordinating with multiple teams to 
implement even minor changes. 
This constant firefighting drained resources, hindered innovation and 
left engineers with little time for strategic work. The situation was further 
complicated by iFood’s explosive data growth. What was once a legacy 
architecture capable of handling 100 million events per day was now 
overwhelmed by a surge of 8 billion–10 billion events daily. As the company 
began training real-time models to analyze app user journeys and surface 
actionable insights, low latency at scale became a critical requirement.
Streamlining pipelines, reducing maintenance and 
enabling real-time insights
Spark Declarative Pipelines proved to be a game changer for iFood. Spark 
Declarative Pipelines enabled iFood to shift to a declarative approach for pipeline 
development. Engineers could now describe their desired transformations in 
simple code, allowing Spark Declarative Pipelines to automatically handle the 
operational complexity behind these pipelines, including execution, scaling and 
monitoring. “So far we’ve reduced coding time by approximately 30% using the 
declarative approach, allowing us to build pipelines significantly faster than 
before,” said Thiago Julião, Data Architecture Specialist at iFood. This transition 
also simplified and consolidated iFood’s data architecture, reducing the number 
of tables from nearly 4,000 to just 100. This reduction also made governance 
more manageable and laid the foundation for improved data quality.
Before Spark Declarative Pipelines, iFood’s pipelines were hindered by  
out-of-memory errors during high-volume event ingestions, leading to  
frequent driver shutdowns and operational disruptions. These recurring failures 
required constant attention from the data engineering team. However, since 
implementing Spark Declarative Pipelines in production, the transformation has 
been remarkable.
“With Spark Declarative Pipelines, we gained greater ease in tracking the user’s 
journey in the application while ensuring high performance in data usage by 
consumer teams — this was a game changer in our process,” said Maristela 
Albuquerque, Data Manager at iFood.
107
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
iFood’s unified data architecture
iFood’s technical architecture is now designed to process streaming data at an 
immense scale, ensuring efficiency, governance and scalability. Here’s a detailed 
breakdown of the architecture and how its components work together to handle 
10 billion daily events while delivering real-time insights.
The data pipeline starts with real-time ingestion of events from iFood’s 
ecosystem, including the consumer app, delivery driver app and partner portal. 
These events flow through Amazon Kinesis queues, where approximately 10 
billion records are ingested daily.
The ingestion pipeline, powered by Spark Declarative Pipelines, enables real-
time data ingestion with scalability, resilience and quality. By adopting Spark 
Declarative Pipelines, iFood reduced ingestion latency from hours to seconds 
— ensuring low-latency data availability critical for real-time analytics, such as 
training models and extracting insights during the user journey without delays. 
“Pipelines now run error-free, delivering reliable performance even under the 
heaviest workloads,” said Julião. “The shift from frequent errors to near-zero 
issues moving to Spark Declarative Pipelines has not only improved operational 
efficiency but also freed up our team to focus on strategic initiatives instead of 
firefighting. We’ve reduced data pipeline maintenance efforts by about 70% by 
consolidating all pipelines to Spark Declarative Pipelines.”
iFood’s architecture leverages a structured medallion approach to manage 
massive data volumes effectively. The Bronze layer consolidates data from 
various platforms into a single table per product, using a predefined schema 
partitioned by processing date. Acting as a staging zone, it ensures extended 
data retention compared to the message queues.
108
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
In the Silver layer, iFood applies Spark Declarative Pipelines expectations and 
quality rules to validate the data. By replacing traditional partitioning with 
Liquid Clustering, all events for a product are consolidated into a single table, 
significantly improving performance and usability. This optimization allows 
iFood to manage massive datasets — such as their largest table, which spans 
210TB and 800 billion records — while maintaining high data quality and 
governance. “Previously, managing two separate environments required constant 
communication across teams, making even small changes challenging. Now, with 
everything under our control, the process is streamlined and more efficient,” said 
Gabriel Campos, Head of Data and AI at iFood.
The new architecture has enabled iFood to centralize data governance 
and enhance data quality without compromising performance or usability. 
Additionally, it has significantly reduced processing and storage costs, achieving 
a 67% cost reduction — cutting expenses from tens of thousands to just 
thousands of dollars per month.
With Spark Declarative Pipelines automating and streamlining data pipeline 
management, iFood’s business analysts from the growth and product teams 
can now effortlessly access data from the Silver layer to create analytical Gold 
tables, empowering them to generate business-critical insights with ease. 
This supports user journey analysis and A/B testing on consumer behavior at 
various stages of their journey, enabling the creation of data-driven strategies 
to enhance the customer experience across iFood’s ecosystem. For example, 
the driver app provides critical insights to the logistics team, helping them 
understand how drivers interact with the app and optimize its usability.  
These insights allow iFood to fine-tune both consumer-facing and  
operational processes, ensuring a seamless experience for customers  
and efficiency for drivers.
iFood plans to further enhance their Databricks implementation by leveraging 
DABs for streamlined development and serverless computing for greater 
flexibility. Upcoming initiatives include implementing column masking for 
sensitive data in the consumption layer and optimizing table performance with 
variant type handling for complex data structures like structs and maps. 
iFood’s transformation to a modern, unified data architecture has redefined 
how the company processes and leverages their vast data ecosystem. And 
by adopting Spark Declarative Pipelines, iFood streamlined their operations, 
eliminated inefficiencies and established a foundation for real-time insights 
and enhanced governance. This shift has not only improved the reliability and 
agility of the company’s data pipelines but also freed up their teams to focus 
on innovation and delivering value to the business. With a scalable, efficient and 
future-ready architecture, iFood is now equipped to respond to the demands of 
a dynamic market while continuing to elevate the customer experience.
109
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
NFCU: Using Real-Time Data to 
Trailblaze Member Personalization
Navy Federal Credit Union was founded during the Great Depression by seven 
U.S. Navy employees who wanted to help themselves and their coworkers 
reach their financial goals. Today, Navy Federal Credit Union is the largest credit 
union in the world, serving 13 million member-owners. Navy Federal’s priority 
is to provide a personalized, omnichannel experience to their members. But to 
understand their members better, they needed to ingest and analyze online 
telemetry data in real time. To accomplish that, Navy Federal turned to Spark 
Declarative Pipelines, Databricks SQL and Microsoft Power BI.
Near real-time data introduces new insights
In June 2023, Navy Federal was about to start the process of migrating millions 
of users to the latest version of their online banking platform. The company 
planned to complete this migration in a controlled manner with small user 
groups, gradually expanding to all their members over several months.
The simplicity of the Spark Declarative Pipelines 
programming model combined with its service capabilities 
resulted in an incredibly fast turnaround time. It allowed us 
to get a whole new type of workload to production in record 
time with good quality.
— Jian (Miracle) Zhou, Senior Engineering Manager, Navy Federal Credit Union
INDUSTRY Financial Services
CLOUD Azure
CUSTOMER 
STORY
Billions 9 billion 6-week
of application events 
per month processed 
by Spark Declarative 
Pipelines
events streamed 
continuously for 
9 months, 24/7, 
with ~100% zero 
maintenance
time to market 
for a new real-
time omnichannel 
application
110
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
To make informed decisions, Navy Federal needed to closely track how members 
interacted with their product. To accomplish that, Navy Federal engineers 
created data pipelines to their data lake, and data analysts built dashboards 
and reports to visualize KPIs. The pipelines ran daily, so the information from the 
previous day would be available to leadership at the beginning of a new day. “The 
pipeline ran perfectly, but in today’s world, 24 hours is a long turnaround time,” 
Jian (Miracle) Zhou, senior engineering manager at Navy Federal Credit Union, 
said. “As we were moving closer to the first wave of user migration, we decided to 
enhance our data solution to introduce new insights in near real time.”
To accomplish that, the organization needed to create a near real-time 
dashboard with two KPIs: the number of unique members who were able to 
log into the new channel, and the number of unique sessions the channel 
served. Additionally, they needed to filter KPIs both by time and by member 
attribute, which was the indicator of which migration wave they belonged to. The 
expectation was that the dashboard would be updated continuously throughout 
the day with a latency of no more than 10 minutes.
Zhou faced two primary challenges: time and scale. The organization only had 
about six weeks to build a solution from scratch and get it into production. “This 
was actually the first time my team tried to build a real-time solution in Azure 
Cloud, and we had to figure out everything in six weeks,” he said. “And scale-
wise, we’re talking about billions of application events generated from millions of 
monthly active users, so the solution had to scale as the migration proceeded.”
Databricks Spark Declarative Pipelines helps 
create reliable, performant data pipeline
Navy Federal’s data delivery solutions follow a straightforward path. One side 
is for engineers and is all about data ingestion and curation. For every data 
source, they build a data pipeline to ingest data into their data lake, transform 
it and make it ready to be consumed by customers. This part of the equation is 
very dynamic because of the diversity of its data sources. The other side is for 
data analysts and is all about data serving and visualization. Navy Federal uses 
Azure Data Lake Storage as their storage layer, Databricks SQL as their analytical 
query engine and Power BI for data visualization. Together, they form a simple but 
effective foundation for data analytics.
The source of the data Navy Federal needed to work with was the event 
telemetry generated in their online banking application.
Navy Federal Credit Union faced challenges using Azure Application Insights for 
dashboards due to the lack of access to member attribute data. To address this, 
they streamed telemetry from Application Insights to their data lake using Azure 
Event Hubs, which supported the Kafka protocol for low-latency, high-reliability 
data consumption without requiring coding.
To process the streamed data, Navy Federal used Databricks Spark Declarative 
Pipelines. Zhou and his team used Spark Declarative Pipelines to create a simple 
data pipeline by writing three query functions and two change data capture 
functions. The first function they wrote connects to the event hubs, applies 
some transformation and returns a data frame. The second query function takes 
complex JSON documents and flattens them into individual application event 
records. They then used Spark Declarative Pipelines’s APPLY CHANGES function 
to remove duplicates. In the third query function, they filtered the data down to 
just the login events and then selected only the columns relevant to login. 
111
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Last, they used the APPLY CHANGES function again to ensure there aren’t 
duplicates in the login event table. Finally, they helped Spark Declarative 
Pipelines understand which data should be persisted and which can stay in 
memory (but not be accessible to the outside world) when a pipeline runs. The 
team then used the Expectations feature to set data-quality expectations and 
monitor the health of that data. “That’s all — three query functions and two CDC 
calls to complete all four steps. Simple as that,” Zhou said. “For me, that means 
low-code complexity and short development time.”
Critically, the pipeline Zhou and his team created scales aggressively, which was 
important as the omnichannel user migration progressed. “We started with a 
very small wave and kept increasing the migration size wave after wave. We were 
anticipating that would increase the demand for compute resource, but we were 
not sure exactly how much was needed for every wave. So, when we deployed 
this data pipeline to production, we turned on a feature called Enhanced 
Autoscaling,” Zhou explained. “The processing volume went up quickly, from just 
a few hundred users and a few thousand sessions every day to millions of users 
and billions of application events per month. This pipeline automatically scaled 
the resources depending on the data volume. Our production support engineers 
never had to intervene. They practically forgot about it.”The pipeline was also 
reliable and fault-tolerant. It ran 24/7 continuous streaming for nine months 
and successfully processed about nine billion application events with almost 
zero maintenance. “On some days there were hiccups that caused temporary 
interruptions,” Zhou said. “Those hiccups were the natural result of being in the 
cloud environment. The great thing is that the pipeline showed  
great resilience. Without exception it automatically recovered from those 
transient errors.”
The pipeline was also performant. Even as event volume data skyrocketed,  
the pipeline kept up. “The streaming processing speed and the query response 
time were to our satisfaction. Part of the reason was that Spark Declarative 
Pipelines automatically optimizes, compacts and vacuums the tables it 
manages,” Zhou said. “This effectively eliminates or reduces the small file 
problem and removes files no longer needed from our storage account,  
which leads to better query performance.”
The last mile of the journey was the delivery of the dashboard. Databricks SQL 
allowed them to curate data in Power BI with speed and scale. “Our analysts 
connect Power BI to the data in our data lake through the Databricks SQL 
endpoint, build Power BI semantic models and create insight for visualizations,” 
Zhou explained. “Our dashboard directly queries Databricks. When the visuals 
are rendered, it brings back the latest updates to users in real time.”
Spark Declarative Pipelines get a new type of 
workload to production in record time
Using Spark Declarative Pipelines, Navy Federal was able to complete a proof of 
concept in a week; develop, test and figure out a CI/CD process in three weeks; 
deploy the pipeline to production just before the start date of the first wave 
migration; and release the dashboard just a few days later. 
“The simplicity of the Spark Declarative Pipelines programming model combined 
with its service capabilities resulted in an incredibly fast turnaround time,” Zhou 
said. “It truly allowed us to get a whole new type of workload to production in a 
record time with good quality.”
The release of the real-time user activity monitoring dashboard combined with 
historical views revealed long-term trends, which received overwhelmingly 
positive feedback from Navy Federal’s senior leadership and stakeholders. 
112
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
“Spark Declarative Pipelines hides the complexity of modern data engineering 
under its simple, intuitive, declarative programming model,” Zhou said. “As 
an engineering manager, I love the fact that my engineers can focus on what 
matters the most to the business. Spark Declarative Pipelines can take care of 
what is underneath the surface and ensure not only that our pipeline was built 
and deployed in time, but also held up beautifully in the long run.”
After the first version of the new pipeline went to production, Zhou and his team 
continued to innovate, using Spark Declarative Pipelines to develop and deploy a 
homegrown metadata-driven framework.
Zhou said the three things he likes best about Spark Declarative Pipelines are:
 ■ The simple declarative programming model that accelerated  
speed to market
 ■ Built-in scalability, optimization and reliability — which  
simplified operations
 ■ Accessibility through the API, which enabled space for engineering 
creativity and scalability
113
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
In the high-stakes world of major league baseball, every decision and action can 
be the difference between winning and losing. Understanding how real-time data 
can provide a competitive advantage, the Cincinnati Reds looked to modernize 
their legacy infrastructure that was complex to maintain at scale. To speed 
up their workloads and achieve greater operational efficiency, they prioritized 
serverless capabilities as part of their transformation strategy. By adopting 
the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform, they have completely transformed 
how they manage and analyze large datasets. With Databricks Lakeflow Jobs, 
processes are automated and data pipelines are delivering real-time insights 
that drive smarter, faster decisions — giving players and coaches the tools they 
need to win at the highest level.
Cincinnati Reds: Winning On and 
Off the Field with Cutting-Edge 
Baseball Analytics
INDUSTRY Media & Entertainment
CLOUD Azure
CUSTOMER 
STORY
3–5x 1,000s 83%
Improvement in 
latency with serverless 
Databricks Lakeflow Jobs
Of hours of compute 
time saved daily
Decrease in 
pipeline runtime
With serverless Databricks Lakeflow Jobs, we’ve achieved 
a 3–5x improvement in latency. What used to take 10 
minutes now takes just 2–3 minutes, significantly reducing 
processing times. This has enabled us to deliver faster 
feedback loops for players and coaches, ensuring they  
get the insights they need in near real time to make 
actionable decisions.
— Bryce Dugar, Data Engineering Manager, Cincinnati Reds
114
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Legacy systems strike out on delivering 
timely insights
The Cincinnati Reds, one of Major League Baseball’s oldest franchises, faced 
legacy infrastructure and data challenges hindering their ability to make smarter, 
faster decisions on baseball feedback loops to win more baseball games. Over 
the past decade, data stream volume and complexity grew by up to 100x, driven 
by the rise of Internet of Things (IoT) devices and sensors that track player 
performance, in-stadium activity and fan engagement. This growth created 
significant challenges in handling and processing data in their on-premises 
systems. Processing billions of rows and queries often took hours or even days, 
making real-time applications impractical. Scalability was limited, forcing manual 
troubleshooting that consumed valuable time.
Latency had also become a critical factor, with users expecting immediate 
access to insights and reports, which were previously only available after long 
delays. The data also needed to be accessible and usable for different roles. 
From data scientists who process large amounts of data and train models to  
help the team make predictions to less technical users within the business  
who just need small pieces of information to help drive strategic decision-
making. Additionally, application developers require programmatic access to  
the data stores.
“A lot of the stuff we were doing before was just troubleshooting issues like 
missing rows or unprocessed data. We’d spend hours just fixing those problems 
instead of actually driving insights or improving performance. Our team couldn’t 
keep up with the increasing volume and variety of data — and this manual 
approach left us at a disadvantage, especially with the demand for real-time 
insights in a sport that moves as fast as baseball,” Bryce Dugar, Data Engineering 
Manager at the Cincinnati Reds, explained.
The Cincinnati Reds realized they needed a more scalable and efficient solution 
as their data needs rapidly expanded. Recognizing the limitations of their 
traditional systems, the Reds adopted the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform 
to automate workflows and enable real-time data access. Specifically, with 
Databricks Lakeflow Jobs — the unified orchestration tool for data, analytics and 
AI — they sought to more easily define, manage and monitor jobs with multiple 
tasks for ETL, reduce manual intervention and deliver more timely insights for 
improved decision-making.
Unifying data orchestration with Databricks 
Lakeflow Jobs
With the Databricks Platform serving as a core piece of their data infrastructure, 
Databricks Lakeflow Jobs became central to solving the Reds’ challenges by 
tailoring orchestration to meet their specific needs and integrating seamlessly 
via APIs. This enabled triggering jobs with parameters, allowing greater workflow 
control. Analysts gained independence to develop and execute notebooks with 
improved traceability and iterative processing capabilities.
The team also moved to a serverless architecture, which significantly reduced 
latency. Previously, using job compute, even with pools, often led to delays while 
waiting for jobs to spin up. 
“With serverless Databricks Lakeflow Jobs, we’ve achieved a 3–5x improvement 
in latency. What used to take 10 minutes now takes just 2–3 minutes, significantly 
reducing processing times. This has enabled us to deliver faster feedback loops 
for players and coaches, ensuring they get the insights they need in near real 
time to make actionable decisions,” Bryce said.
115
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
In addition to these time savings, the team saw a 65–80% reduction in VM 
costs by transitioning to serverless Databricks Lakeflow Jobs, making the 
solution not only faster but also significantly more cost-efficient. With the Reds 
running 15,000–20,000 workflow steps daily, this efficiency saved hundreds of 
thousands of compute minutes each day, enabling new workloads and faster 
report delivery.
The team transitioned from Azure Data Factory to Databricks. “With Databricks, 
we’ve completely transformed how we handle data. Moving to a serverless 
architecture and leveraging serverless Databricks Lakeflow Jobs has not only 
streamlined our pipelines but also dramatically reduced latency by up to 83%,” 
Bryce said. “What used to take an hour can now be done in 10 minutes, allowing 
us to run more processes, deliver reports faster and provide near-instant 
feedback for coaching and player development. It’s a game changer for how we 
make real-time decisions in a fast-paced sport like baseball.”
The platform’s serverless environment removed constraints related to memory 
and compute cores. This allowed the team to handle large, complex data 
queries more efficiently, ultimately supporting faster and more accurate insights 
for game-day decisions. The traceability of workflows from data ingestion to 
the final output also improved accountability, making it easier for the team 
to monitor, troubleshoot and optimize their data pipelines. Data scientists 
and engineers no longer face system instability, session crashes or lengthy 
processing times, enabling smoother workflows and higher job satisfaction. 
Furthermore, the modular, automated nature of Databricks Lakeflow Jobs 
significantly lowered the overhead for developers, freeing them up to focus on 
high-value work.
Faster data serves up game-winning decisions
Transitioning to serverless compute significantly reduced job latency, cutting 
pipeline steps from 10–15 minutes to as little as 2–3 minutes. With Databricks 
Lakeflow Jobs streamlining processes, ETL tasks and data science workflows now 
operate with enhanced speed and agility. 
This efficiency ensures rapid post-game data availability, empowering coaches 
with near real-time insights to make critical adjustments and provide immediate 
feedback to players.
“With Databricks, the time savings we’ve realized is almost immeasurable — 
enabling things we couldn’t even consider before. That shift has fundamentally 
changed how we operate and how quickly we can deliver insights to coaches, 
players and analysts,” Bryce concluded. This transformational shift has solidified 
Databricks Lakeflow Jobs as a critical enabler of the Reds’ data-driven strategy, 
empowering the team to make smarter, faster decisions in the high-stakes world 
of professional baseball.
116
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Porsche Holding Salzburg is Europe’s largest automotive retail company, 
operating in 23 countries throughout Europe as well as in Colombia, Chile, 
China, Malaysia, Singapore and Japan. They represent the Volkswagen Group 
brands in wholesale (as an importer), retail (through their dealers) and the after-
sales business (service). The company also covers the entire spectrum of the 
automotive trade, including spare parts distribution, a full range of automobile 
financing services and in-house IT system development.
Since March 2011, Porsche has been a 100% subsidiary of Volkswagen AG, 
contributing decades of know-how in the automotive business to Volkswagen 
Group global sales. By the end of 2023, the company employed a workforce of 
35,900 and had sold more than 747,700 new vehicles, generating a turnover of 
€29.4 billion.
However, fragmented data systems meant customer engagements remained 
siloed, limiting the company’s ability to connect them and deliver modern, 
personalized experiences. To transform how they engaged with customers while 
also enabling data-driven decision-making, Porsche turned to Lakeflow Connect 
and the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform.
Porsche Holding: Unifying 
Customer Data to Drive a New 
Automotive Experience
INDUSTRY Manufacturing
CLOUD Azure
CUSTOMER 
STORY
85%
Faster development using production-ready Lakeflow 
Connect instead of a homegrown solution
Using the Salesforce connector from Lakeflow Connect 
helps us close a critical gap for Porsche from the business 
side on ease of use and price. On the customer side, we’re 
able to create a completely new customer experience that 
strengthens the bond between Porsche and the customer 
with a unified and unfragmented customer journey.
— Lucas Sulzberger, Project Manager, Porsche Holding
117
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Siloed systems limit a holistic view  
of customer insights
When customers interact with Porsche — from dealership visits and banking 
services to after-sales support — they generate millions of data points that  
hold the key to delivering personalized customer experiences and driving 
business growth.
In an automotive retail environment where exceptional service directly correlates 
with repeat purchases and brand loyalty, Porsche data analysts struggled 
to connect customer interaction data from Salesforce — including email 
engagement metrics, campaign responses and customer behavior patterns — 
to the wealth of information stored in their data lake. Marketing teams couldn’t 
easily access the data they needed to optimize campaigns and calculate 
ROI. Customer experience teams lacked the unified view necessary to deliver 
personalized recommendations for specific customer offers such as leasing 
renewals or maintenance services. “We have a lot of touchpoints and systems 
interacting with our customers,” Lucas Sulzberger, Project Manager at Porsche 
Holding, said. “It was pretty difficult to have all the important data that helps us 
create the perfect customer story in one place.”
The manual maintenance required for a custom solution would likely consume 
significant resources and make it challenging to scale efficiently. This would 
be especially problematic given the automotive industry’s rapid shift toward 
omnichannel retail, with most buyers now expecting seamless transitions 
between online research, virtual showrooms and in-person dealership 
experiences. The stakes were particularly high because research shows that 
vehicle buyers looking for premium or luxury brands spend significantly less 
time at dealerships than mass-market customers, making every interaction  
more crucial.
Porsche’s main priority was to establish a unified data infrastructure that 
would support the ability to scale while maintaining operational efficiency and 
implementing robust, sophisticated analytics. Specifically, the company wanted 
to eliminate data silos between their CRM and analytics environments, reduce 
the maintenance burden of custom integrations and enable more advanced use 
cases like predictive analytics and personalized marketing. Instead of having a 
custom or homegrown solution, they wanted a more scalable and sustainable 
platform that could handle complex data requirements.
Incremental data ingestion with Databricks 
Lakeflow Connect
To address their data goals, Porsche turned to Databricks Lakeflow Connect, 
which offers native data ingestion connectors for popular SaaS applications, 
databases and file sources for any practitioner wanting to build incremental 
data pipelines at scale. These built-in connectors provide efficient, end-to-
end incremental ingestion and easy setup with a simple UI or API access. Fully 
integrated with the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform, Lakeflow Connect 
provides customers with the benefits of unified governance, powered by 
serverless compute. More broadly, Lakeflow Connect is part of Lakeflow, a new 
unified data engineering solution that spans ingestion, transformation  
and orchestration.
Porsche was interested in the Lakeflow Connect Salesforce connector to create 
unified access to their customer data and access Salesforce Sales Cloud directly 
from within their Databricks Platform. Lakeflow Connect offered a streamlined 
solution to the company’s data integration challenges — they were able to ingest 
data from Salesforce, transform it in batch and streaming modes, and deploy and 
operate in production.
118
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
In addition, Lakeflow Connect provided the needed flexibility to adjust data 
synchronization schedules based on business demands, which is a mission-
critical feature for Porsche. Whether the data and AI team want daily updates, 
monthly updates or hourly synchronization, Lakeflow Connect can be fine-tuned 
to match specific use cases. “With Databricks, we get great flexibility with very 
low effort,” Markus Gruber, Principal Data Scientist at Porsche Holding, noted. 
“Basically, you just set the schedule and it’s done. That saved us a lot of money 
during implementation and also long term for maintenance.”
“Lakeflow Connect allows us to access all of our CRM data in near real-time 
— everything with sales and marketing touchpoints — and it’s easy to set up, 
efficient and flexible,” Lucas added.
Furthermore, since Lakeflow Connect is a managed product with full 
observability, monitoring and governance, there’s no need to worry about 
ongoing maintenance. This is particularly helpful for Porsche and the broader 
automotive sector, where IT resources are increasingly focusing on innovation 
in emerging areas such as connected car technologies and digital retail 
experiences rather than allocating time to managing infrastructure.
The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform now forms the core of Porsche 
Holding’s data lake. Unity Catalog provides data governance and security, the 
ingestion pipeline works with Salesforce and Lakeflow Connect to ensure reliable 
synchronization of CRM data, and Lakeflow Jobs enables sophisticated job 
scheduling and notifications.
Transforming customer experience through  
unified data
The Databricks Data Intelligence Platform and Lakeflow Connect have 
transformed how Porsche manages and uses their customer data.
By opting to use Lakeflow Connect instead of building a custom solution,  
the company has reaped the benefits of both operational efficiency  
and cost management.
Internally, teams at Porsche now spend less time managing data integration 
processes. “Lakeflow Connect has enabled our dedicated CRM and data science 
teams to be more productive as they can now focus on their core work to help 
innovate instead of spending valuable time on the data ingestion integration with 
Salesforce,” Markus explained.
This shift in focus aligns with broader industry trends as automotive companies 
redirect significant portions of their IT budgets toward customer experience 
innovations and digital transformation initiatives.
From a business perspective, this managed solution has reduced development 
time and effort, accelerated time to production and minimized risks and costs 
through a sustainable approach to data connectivity. “Lakeflow Connect helps us 
close a critical gap for Porsche from the business side on ease of use and price,” 
Lucas said.
Perhaps most notably, the unified data infrastructure has enabled Porsche to 
reimagine their customer journey. Instead of fragmented interactions across 
different touchpoints, customers now experience a more coherent, personalized 
relationship with the brand. For example, customers can receive a personalized 
offer based on their previous interactions with Porsche. Lucas explained, “On 
the customer side, we’re able to create a completely new customer experience 
that strengthens the bond between Porsche and the customer with a unified 
customer journey.”
This transformation also aligns with Porsche’s broader strategic vision. “One 
of our goals is to become a more data-driven company,” Markus stated. “The 
Databricks Platform is one of the important components to help us get there.”
119
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Hinge Health is transforming the way pain is treated and prevented by 
connecting people digitally with expert clinical care. The company’s solutions 
are designed to help people decrease musculoskeletal pain, surgeries and 
opioid use, resulting in proven reductions in spending on medical claims. Hinge 
Health is available to over 18 million people and has 1,800 employer health plan 
clients. Personalized care plans require data to be continuously updated and 
analyzed. Hinge Health needed to reduce costs and scale as new data sources 
were onboarded. The company turned to Databricks Spark Declarative Pipelines 
to simplify change data capture, improve data reliability, meet service level 
agreements (SLAs) and reduce total cost of ownership.
“We’ve reduced costs by at least 50% by migrating to Spark 
Declarative Pipelines compared to when we started this 
journey, even though we now have 10 times more data.“
— Veera Mukkanagoudar, Senior Engineering Manager, Hinge Health
Hinge Health: Developing 
Personalized Care Plans to 
Improve Patient Outcomes
INDUSTRY Healthcare and Life Sciences
PLATFORM Spark Declarative Pipelines
CLOUD AWS
CUSTOMER 
STORY
50% 80% 300 TB
Reduced costs Reduced latency Of data transformed by Spark 
Declarative Pipelines
120
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Managing a 10x growth in data
Hinge Health uses custom ingestion and CDC to consume data from 70+ 
first- and third-party data sources via Fivetran. The company currently has 
2,000 Postgres tables spread across 35+ databases. Over the last few years, 
the amount of data Hinge consumes has grown 10-fold, making it difficult 
to propagate schema and data at the same time. “When we started building 
our data platform, we had 20–30 terabytes of data. That grew to nearly 300 
terabytes within a year,” Veera Mukkanagoudar, Senior Engineering Manager at 
Hinge Health, said. “As a data engineering leader, cost optimization is an ongoing 
journey. We have to build things where the costs grow linearly as the data volume 
and velocity grows. We could not grow our data cost by 10 times.”
The company needed to build an efficient, low-cost, low-latency data pipeline to 
ingest and transform data from heterogeneous sources at scale.
The journey to an optimized CDC architecture
Hinge Health data engineering leaders evaluated a number of solutions to enable 
their data engineering mission, including Snowflake, EMR, Redshift and Glue. 
Ultimately, the company chose Databricks Spark Declarative Pipelines. “We liked 
Databricks the best,” Veera said. “One feature stood out the most — the ability 
to support extract, load, transform (ELT), data warehousing, ML streaming, batch 
and generative AI (GenAI) workloads without moving data to meet the needs 
of the use case. We don’t have to copy the data between different systems to 
serve different applications. Name a problem in the data space and there is a 
Databricks tool available to solve it. We can serve everything on a single platform. 
That adds up to faster application development time.”
Once they selected Databricks, Hinge Health spun up a new data pipeline 
using Spark Declarative Pipelines to unify batch and streaming workloads and 
transform 300 terabytes of data. The primary objective was to isolate any large 
loads coming from large databases so they didn’t impact smaller databases. “We 
don’t have control over upstream databases,” Veera said. “There is a possibility 
that an upstream database or source could do a backward-compatible change, 
which could cause a failure. We did not want it to impact other data pipelines.”
Veera and his team built an initial pipeline using Debezium Postgres reader to 
stream data to Kafka. They then used Amazon S3 to sync the data to an S3 
bucket. They used two Spark Declarative Pipelines pipelines: one to ingest the 
data from the S3 bucket to a staging table, which broadcast that data into a 
series of history tables, and the other to generate data for the latest version of 
the table. 
That architecture had a couple of challenges. First, using S3 meant they 
needed storage, query and additional compute to store and retrieve data from 
intermediary storage. This had implications for compute utilization and cost. 
There were also reliability and latency challenges that made it difficult for the 
team to meet their SLAs.
Veera and his team realized they needed to move to Kafka as the data source 
rather than S3. As they did so, they also improved the staging table design which 
enabled better compute utilization and allowed them to easily onboard data to 
pipelines that could accommodate the load rather than to pipelines that already 
had a taxed driver. The team now mirrors source databases in a lakehouse target 
by collecting and writing change logs from Aurora to serve data in Delta for 
GenAI and non-GenAI use cases using Spark Declarative Pipelines. With topics as 
their new source, the team was able to simplify and consolidate.
121
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
Veera said he especially likes Spark Declarative Pipelines’s Python- and SQL -
based parameterization features. “We have 35 data pipelines running, but they 
all run off a single code base,” he said. “We have parameterized all the table 
definitions, columns, data types and the database names — everything.”
Lowering costs while scaling
With a new CDC pipeline reading from Kafka instead of S3 and the ability to 
configure ingestion from multiple databases with a single data pipeline, Hinge 
Health has dramatically reduced their costs. Veera estimated, “We’ve reduced 
costs by at least 50% by migrating to Spark Declarative Pipelines compared to 
when they started this journey, even though they now have 10 times more data.” 
Veera added, “Taking out S3 as a part of our data pipeline was very powerful.” 
Additionally, they’ve improved compute utilization in smaller databases, 
increased reliability and reduced latency by 80%. “With the first iteration of the 
pipeline, it was challenging to meet SLAs and we were always running into issues 
with large data changes in upstream databases,” he explained. “Latency was 
nearly four times when we were using S3.”
Spark Declarative Pipelines significantly enhances Hinge Health’s data 
architecture by providing the benefits of materialized views, streamlining 
their CDC processes. Business insights from change data are served to the 
downstream teams as precomputed materialized views. Spark Declarative 
Pipelines combines streaming tables with incrementally updated materialized 
views, avoiding the need to completely rebuild the view when new data arrives. 
This allows Hinge Health to reduce data processing costs and update reports 
and dashboards in real time.
Ultimately, Hinge Health’s optimized CDC architecture adds up to happier users. 
“Data engineers are happy because they have less troubleshooting to do,” Veera 
said. “Our data science team is happy because we can meet our SLAs. Our 
engineering leadership is happy because they are always pushing us to optimize 
our costs. And our ML applications team is happy because they want to see data 
as fast as possible.”
122
BIG BOOK OF DATA ENGINEERING
© Databricks 2025. All rights reserved. Apache, Apache Spark, Spark and the Spark logo are trademarks of the Apache Software Foundation . Privacy Policy  | Terms of Use
About Databricks
Databricks is the data and AI company. More than 15,000 organizations worldwide — 
including Block, Comcast, Condé Nast, Rivian, Shell and over 60% of the Fortune 500 — 
rely on the Databricks Data Intelligence Platform to take control of their data and put it to 
work with AI. Databricks is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices around the globe, 
and was founded by the original creators of Lakehouse, Apache Spark™, Delta Lake, MLflow 
and Unity Catalog. To learn more, follow Databricks on LinkedIn, X and Facebook.
Ingest, transform and orchestrate  
with a unified data engineering solution
Databricks Lakeflow is built to address the key challenges data 
engineering teams face today. As an end-to-end data engineering 
solution with built-in data intelligence, Lakeflow unifies and 
simplifies data ingestion, transformation and orchestration by 
offering a singular approach to data pipeline creation.
Learn more Watch a demo Try Databricks free